I call this meeting of the South Portland City Council
to order on February 17th, 2026, noting
that it is 2026 Mardi Gras.
So
please join me if you wish to join a Pledge Allegiance
to the Republic of the United States pledge
Allegiance to the flag of the United States of America,
and, and to the Republic for which it stands,
one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for all.
Madam City Clerks, may we have a roll call, please?
Counselor Coleman Here. Counselor Matthews? Yes ma'am.
Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West here. And Mayor Tipton
Here.
Are there any additions
or corrections to the minutes of our meetings?
This would be our last business meeting
and our last executive session.
I don't see additions or corrections seeing no objection.
Let's pass the minutes by unanimous consent. Thank you.
The minutes are approved
and we will move to petitions and communications.
This is just a reminder from the city clerk's office
that we do have applications available for election clerks
for a two year term from 26 to 28.
And I did wanna add this on the agenda
to strongly encourage those
of the Republican party in our area
that have not applied that wish to.
We are still on low on those applications coming through,
and we do wanna make sure that we have party balance
at all of our elections.
Thank you very much. I think we have another part of that,
which is a follow up memo.
Did you wanna talk about that, Mr. City Manager? Thank you.
Yeah. So there's two, two items on here from me
for petitions and communications.
The first is a follow up memo
regarding the WA Wright Field, uh, festival.
You might recall, um, uh, not quite a year ago,
you had been approached by a promoter, uh,
to utilize WA Wright for a, uh, multi-day music festival.
Uh, and ultimately a majority of counselors were supportive
of at least looking further into the concept.
Uh, one of the initial hurdles was
to contact the Wayne Wright family, who had, uh,
donated the land to the city with a deed restriction
that it be used for recreational purposes.
And so, uh, since that time we've been trying
to get in touch with the family
to see if they would consider this a recreational use
before we even, uh, did any other, uh, legwork.
Ultimately we're able to, uh, connect
with someone not directly with the family,
but who had, uh, spoken, uh, with the family.
Um, and, and they had discussed this
after hearing about it in the news last, uh, summer.
And, uh, they were of the unanimous opinion that a a,
a concert or a festival like this is not, uh,
what the intent of Mr.
Wa Wright was when he donated this land.
And so at this point, the city does not intend
to pursue this matter any further.
Just wanted to provide the counsel with a formal heads up,
uh, since this was discussed during a, um, prior workshop.
Thank you. Our rules for petitions
and communications allow counselor questions.
Do we have any, alright,
could you read the third item, please?
Uh, third item is a memo from our economic
development director, Leah Duffy.
Uh, who, um,
regarding the business micro loan or grant program.
Uh, so, uh, earlier this month, uh, the,
she had looked into, uh, the idea of, uh,
possibly establishing a grant
or loan fund for businesses impacted
by recent immigration enforcement activities.
Uh, and I had sent around, uh, a, a memo, uh,
when the request was made of her to do this, to kind
of give an overview of what the next steps were.
And essentially, uh, the conclusion was we're gonna wait
for a, a survey from the Greater Portland Council
of Governments to gauge, uh, from the business community
what the need and demand, uh, was out there.
We thought at the time that, um,
because a number of South Portland businesses were, um,
contacted as part of that survey that GB cog would be able
to break it down by, uh, community.
Unfortunately, uh, they did not track it in that manner.
So all we had was the aggregated data, which, um,
we've shared with you the results of,
uh, in the, in the memo.
Um, ultimately the city staff is not, um,
recommending moving forward with any sort of grant
or loan program at this time.
But, um, if there is a desire amongst council
to pursue this, uh, it could be the topic
of a future workshop and, um,
if there are additional ICE activities, uh,
or business reporting adverse effects, um, uh, we could, uh,
work with GP Cog to perhaps conduct a follow-up survey
that does get more specific with South Portland businesses.
Thank you. Are there any counselor questions on that item?
I do have one. Um, in the memo from our economic director,
it says, should the council wish to move forward
with a program funding could be procured from TIFF reserves
or repurposing existing revolving loan funds?
The question is, if at some time the council was motivated
to bring this back up with staff, is that still true?
Is that still where we would look for funding?
I'd say mostly probably the tiff, um, reserves.
The, um, the good news is since you repurposed existing, um,
business loan funds, uh, uh, within the past few months,
I believe we've already had enough applications
and assistant city manager can correct me if I'm wrong,
that would basically eat up all those funds.
So those would no longer ironically be a source with it
as of the past week.
Okay. Um, so I'll circle one and not the other.
Alright, I ask that
because, well, that's not a question,
nevermind why I asked it.
I asked it 'cause I wanted to know the answer. Thank you.
Alright, we'll be moving shortly to our consent calendar,
but in the meantime, we'd like
to hear the rules for public comment. Please,
Would you like to postpone the appointment calendar first?
Oh, I would very much like
to postpone the appointment calendar, please.
I have a, a, a nasty habit in the last two
meetings of just skipping things.
So, um,
unless I see objection, we're going
to postpone the appointment calendar to our next
business meeting date, which I believe is March 3rd,
Tuesday, March 3rd.
Do we see objection for doing that? I don't. So moved.
The appointment calendar is postponed
and now we can hear the rules for public comment.
Thank you. You're very welcome.
Members of the public are invited
to comment on any topic on
or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak about an item appearing on
tonight's agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until this comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you're unable to wait, you may speak on a matter
during citizen discussion part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again, members of the public
who speak on a topic when it comes up on the agenda
may not speak on the topic.
Again, during citizen discussion, part two,
we ask all speakers
to state their name and address for the record.
Thank you very much. So when you do make public comment,
you're going to see timers running on both of these screens.
You'll get a warning when you have 30 seconds left just
so you know that you should wrap up.
Um, you don't have
to use your full three minutes if you feel like you can make
your point in less time.
And, um, I think that
that is about it.
Thank you. Um,
can you please read the items on the
consent calendar? Madam Clerk?
Of course. Order number 1 30 25 26 Conservation Commission
for Caleb Abbott for district three for a term
that expires March 3rd, 2029.
Order number 1 34 25 26.
Historic preservation for Peter Cullen for district two
for a term that expires January 31st, 2029.
Order 1 48 25 26 Accepting a proposal from SIMERA
for the PFML coverage
provided from the state approves the transfer
to a private plan order, 1 49 25 26, acceptance
of Maine Department of Transportation offer
of just compensation in the amount of $600
and order number 1 50 25 26 accepting
criminal forfeiture funds in the amounts of $1,965.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Thank you very much. Does any counselor wish
to move an item from the consent calendar?
Councilor Walker, I'd like to
Remove order number 1 4 8 25 26
Please.
All right, thank you.
We will then put that under action on old and new business
and I think we can make that the first item there.
Okay. Make myself Put a little note.
Okay, we've moved that
and we have as our first opportunity
for public comment, an opportunity
to comment only on the consent calendar items.
So if you'd like to do that, please come to the podium.
Do we have anyone who wants
to comment on consent calendar items?
I don't see any. How about you newcomers? Nope.
Don't see any there. Alright,
well then I think public comment on the consent calendar is
closed and it is time to vote on those items.
What is the wish of the council
Move for passage?
Councilor Coleman moves for passage. We have a second.
We have a second by Jessica Walker. Thank you very much.
Um, do we have a vote?
All in favor of the consent calendar items. Passing.
Looks like we have a unanimous vote on that.
Thank you very much.
Alright, now we have gotten to citizen discussion part one.
So the way that this works,
it is our first open comment period.
We have two in this meeting.
There'll be one at the very end of the meeting.
You may comment on any item on
or off the agenda this evening.
And if you wish to, you can also wait until
the agenda item comes up
and you'll be able to make a comment about a
specific agenda item.
Then do we have anyone who'd like
to make public comment at this time?
Please come to the podium. We'd like to hear your name.
You can say the street you live on.
Um, you don't have to give your full address.
Alright. Um, hello Council. Okay, go for it.
Yes, go for it. Okay.
Hello, council members, mayor and city manager.
My name is Malcolm Meyer Decare
and I've lived in the city of South Portland
for the last four years.
I rent an apartment with my wife, Caroline.
It's a wonderful little neighborhood full
of families right by the train yard.
It's primarily an area
of housing though there have been a number
of businesses within walking distance
or short drive, if I'm honest
and more have been added in recent years.
I come before you today
because I'm deeply concerned
that the Walgreens on the corner of Main Street
and Broadway right in cash corner is closing.
I was made aware of this issue about a month ago when it was
posted in the South Portland community Facebook page
when I went up, uh, to fill my prescription at the pharmacy.
I also noticed that they had signs
posted about this closure.
As it stands, the Walgreens is set to close on March 5th.
I won't deny it doesn't seem like this was completely
unreasonable to close
and that the end had been coming for quite some time.
It's been pretty empty when I would drop by.
However, that doesn't change that.
It's been a valuable resource for many,
including my own family.
As I mentioned, it's my go-to pharmacy being down the street
from us just under a mile away.
It's also served as a great place
to get a forgotten toiletry item over the counter medicine
and other necessities such
as sending packages through FedEx.
Once the location closes, the nearest FedEx onsite location
and pharmacy will be in Scarborough,
which is three miles away at another Walgreens.
Other pharmacies will be Hannaford, which is in Scarborough,
three miles away, Walmart, which is also in Scarborough,
three miles away, and a Hannaford in South Portland
just three miles away.
Other businesses such as the, as the Dollar General,
which is a little bit closer than the Walgreens may be able
to make up for some of these losses in some ways,
but cannot fulfill all these needs.
So while I understand the South Portland City Council really
has no say in stopping Walgreens from closing this location,
I am here to urge members to be thoughtful about
what could go in the space in the future, work
with the property owner to do so.
There's been a closed down store right across the street
from the Walgreens that has been dark ever since I moved in.
No noticeable business going on at that location though.
I will note that the South Portland, uh,
school district has, um, advertised
for needing more bus drivers at that spot in the past.
While certainly it's not the best spot in many locations
for business, it could really behoove the community
to have something in both spots That seconds would be
contributing to taxes, doing commerce,
and serving the residents
and visitors of our great community.
With that, thank you.
Thank you so much for coming and making your comments.
Thank you. Do we have another
person who would like to make a comment?
Aha, please do.
Good evening. My name is Cassie Moon
and I live at 46th Dawson Street.
I wanna speak to you all about that.
If I've experienced since ICE came to our town,
I've supported the immigrant community
for approximately 15 years,
and these families are part of my daily life.
Since ICE kidnapped the mom
and two children at the laundromat at Westbrook Street,
I felt compelled to help keep people safe.
I want you to know what this looks like.
One family is a mom with five children.
She works to pay her rent
and ice is circling her neighborhood in an effort
to assist her in protection from ice.
At 1:00 PM I call her to say I'm
outside her home to take her to work.
She runs to my car, opens the back door,
and dives to the floor of my car crying.
She calls her children to remind them to stay inside,
keep the door locked and not open it for anyone.
Even if she know, if they know them.
I proceed to take back roads to get her safely at work.
She doesn't dare to risk ice finding her children,
so she doesn't want to go home.
I pick her up from her work at midnight
and I drive her to another place to stay, not her home.
She needs to stay where her children can be safe.
I've been doing grocery shopping, taking children
to school when they've deemed safe driving parents to work,
doing laundry in my home
because it's not safe for them to go
to the laundromat if they're an immigrant citizen.
I'd like to remind everyone that's listening to this,
that the immigrants I'm working with have jobs.
They possess a legal work permit.
You cannot work without a permit
and they cannot get a permit.
If they're illegally here for them.
I'm simply going for them.
Simply going to work puts them in imminent danger.
When ICE is in town, their fear is palatable.
It's imperative to understand this.
The vast majority
of our immigrant friends live paycheck to paycheck.
Losing two weeks of pay gets them months
to get back on track.
If it's a two income family
and one parent is forced to stay home for the sake
of the children's safety.
Some are single parents with teens who normally have jobs
to help out 30 seconds,
but they're forced to stay home in the words of one,
it's worse in this country now than it was in their country
where they could at least go outside.
In the words of a 10-year-old who asked me,
why are they doing this to us?
My parents work and pay taxes
and do everything right, I can't understand these things,
but I trust my parents.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Would you like to make a comment, sir?
Councilors, Jeff Steinberg Cottage Road.
Uh, it seems timely maybe for me to raise my questions, uh,
in the wake of the last speaker's comments
and to say that I'm honored to follow her.
So I have just four questions
and I won't occupy my full three minutes
unless I speak very slowly.
We're told by Senator Susan Collins, this is one we're told
by Senator Susan Collins
after a conversation with, I can't believe I'm saying this,
secretary of Homeland Security, Christie Nome,
that border patrol
and ICE agents in our area are being withdrawn
and their number returned to
Normal Or pre ramp up levels.
Do we as a municipality have any way
to know that this is true?
And if so, is it two
has local law enforcement, our own South Portland police
receives calls from people in South Portland seeking help
or protection from ICE or border patrol agents?
And if so, are those calls increasing, decreasing,
or maintaining at about the same level
three as local law enforcement?
Our own Southport police received calls from ICE
or border patrol agents seeking help
or protection from people in South Portland.
And if so, are those calls increasing, decreasing,
or maintaining at about the same level?
And four, if we do the research ourselves, we find
that 206 people in the Portland area were recently arrested
by ice and that of
that number 182 have been transferred
to facilities out of state.
Does ICE do anything to inform local municipalities
that this is happening?
If not, do we have any recourse?
How are we gonna know what's happening
to South Portland people?
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have anyone else who'd like
to make a comment at this time?
Just because I saw a couple of other people come in.
This is our, excuse me, our public comment period
for items on our agenda or off our agenda.
You'll also be able
to make comments on specific agenda
items when we get to them.
Um, good evening. I also am honored to follow, uh,
my two fellow citizens here.
I'm Julia Edwards, Dawson Street.
I'm gonna speak more generally
because we have, uh, hundreds of people helping
with this effort that are afraid that any identification of
who they are, their activity
or how they're helping could lead to, um, problems
with their safety and their family's safety
and also the people that are being helped.
So, um, if this sounds too, um, farfetched
or you need more detail, I'm sorry, I'm not gonna do that.
But, um, I just wanted to give some further examples
of experiences that I know of.
Um, feel free to ask me after how I know.
But, um, I know these things are happening.
People are still afraid to leave their homes.
Hundreds and hundreds of our citizens literally
will not leave their homes.
Many of them will not let their children leave their
homes for good reason.
So those kids are missing out on school
or are being forced to do remote school,
which is also incredibly unfair.
We've had, um, citizens be returned from
being taken and lost their jobs, um,
cannot pay their rent because of it.
Don't know when their jobs are coming back.
Turning to community members for help,
we're trying to do the best we can.
Um, I say we, capital w um, we've got kids
that are having nightmares.
We've got, um,
I'd say not obvious targeted children like my son.
Um, we're white.
We're probably not the target of ice activity,
but he's having a hard time with this.
He's six and is wondering why there are kids in
his class that still aren't there.
Um, we have people
who are helping at great risk, um,
that have been told they're on some watch list.
You know, congratulations, you're on this list.
Um, we've had people be visually threatened
and intimidated, um, just for delivering groceries.
We've had people have their buildings targeted, um,
under the guise of being helpers, uh,
bringing doorbells to try to gain access to a building.
Um, we have several people who only feel safe enough to
scurry to a car if a white body is
there to help them feel safe.
30 seconds people have done this for children
and the fact that they're afraid
to go 15 feet from their door to a vehicle,
let alone 15 feet from their door to the corner of the block
to get the bus, is just beyond the pale.
Um, I give you all of these examples
because what is coming up on the agenda is very important.
And if you aren't aware of what's been going on,
hopefully this gives you a little bit
more Detailed consider.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening. Uh, Carolyn Nishan, also Dawson Street.
Uh, and I'd like to just, uh, add on to, um,
my fellow Dawson Street mates.
Um, in addition,
there are young people that may have to drop out of school
because they're too afraid, uh, to come outside.
There are people that have done everything
for their families and
to protect their own safety will not go to work.
And they have made that choice
because they're afraid for their own lives
and for the lives of their children.
And so, with Ordinance 17, 25, 26 coming up,
I ask that you all please support this moratorium eviction,
uh, temporary moratorium on evictions.
And I would hope that a month from now,
five months from now, a year from now, five years from now,
when we look back on this moment, this body can look back
and say, I made the choices necessary
to support the most vulnerable people in our community
because they cannot be here right now.
And so we are speaking on their behalf.
And you have the ability to make the choice
to support the most vulnerable with your votes.
I know that there are all sorts of ripple effects
that come from these types of temporary moratorium.
Please make the humane decision
to support the most vulnerable in our community.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Do we have anyone else who would like
to make a public comment at this time on an item on
or off the agenda?
You'll also have a chance
to make a comment on each agenda item.
Good evening counselors Pedro Vasquez.
Uh, tonight I'm speaking in my capacity as the chair
of the South World Human Rights Commission
and Advisory Group to this body.
And I wanna talk to you about
the MICROGRANTS and the micro-grant.
Uh, microloan program for small businesses impacted
by recent immigration enforcement activity.
Uh, first I want to acknowledge the work of the staff.
Uh, that memo reflects a lot of thoughtful research
and a real commitment to supporting our business community.
However, I am concerned about the overall direction
of waiting for more data before taking action.
Small businesses, particularly ones that are owned
by immigrants, do not experience hardship
on a delayed timeline.
Loss of revenue happens immediately.
Rent, payroll and inventory costs do not wait for surveys
or regional consensus.
The memo notes that the data is still being gathered
and the neighboring communities are
monitoring the situation.
Leadership is not about waiting for others to move first,
it's about responding.
When our own community is experiencing that,
we already know enough to act.
We know some businesses are seeing reduced
consum customer traffic.
We know that fear changes
how people participate in the local economy.
And we know that small businesses,
especially immigrant owned businesses,
often operate on thin margins,
where even a short disruption can cause lasting damage.
Waiting for perfect information carries its own risk.
By the time impact is fully documented,
that harm may already be done.
The memo itself identifies potential funding options
to f reserves, revolving loan funds or private donations.
That tells us that those tools exist.
And what's needed now is the decision to use them.
South Portland has an opportunity to lead.
Once again, a small targeted time-limited micro grant
program can be responsible, accountable, and responsive.
And most importantly, time Economic stability
and community stability go hand in hand
when small businesses struggle neighborhoods.
Feel it? I'm urging you not
to settle into this wait and see approach.
I'm urging you to move forward now
with a modest pilot microgram program that helps
businesses stay open while this moment
of uncertainty continues.
Thank you. And just as a follow up
so you understand what's going on, my name
and my skin marks me
and makes me a target to what's happening in our community.
I and members of my family are walking around
with our birth certificates.
That's where we are.
Yeah, can check them. Thank you very much.
Is there anyone else who would like
to make public comment at this time?
Um, on the same topic? Topic she still can ask.
Oh, apparently you're going to have to wait. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyway. Aha.
This is on a different topic.
Uh, my name's Ed KI live at Romano Road.
Oh, you can do any topic you want.
What's that? You Hadn't topic spoken yet.
Um, I was here last week, uh,
February 10th at the school board budget workshop, um,
where council member Scott, um, disclosed
that her spouse was an employee of the South Portland,
um, school department.
And I'm not a lawyer by any means, so I'm not trying
to act like I know more than I know could.
But if I understand the council rules correctly, uh,
what should have happened was the council should have taken
maybe a vote whether she should have been allowed
to continue because there's a conflict of interest
because she has a household member
or spouse in this case that's a school board, uh, employee,
or not a school board employee, excuse me,
a school, a school employee.
And I'm just wondering, am I understanding the rules
correctly or am I not understanding the rules correctly?
Understanding. And if I am understanding the rules
correctly, will Counselor Scott not be allowed
to comment on the school budget
or vote on the school budget, let alone
because of that? Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And, and I, we will get an answer to
that question in moments.
But meanwhile, do we have anyone else who wants
to make a public comment?
Please come to the podium. Don't be shy. Run right down.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm a landlord. Um, I own one house.
It's a, a duplex
and I have a, can you state your name for the record?
Oh, sorry. Thank, my name is Louise Rocha McCarthy.
I own a property in, uh, ferry Village.
And I actually want you to know that I am in favor of the,
uh, resolution to, uh, to protect immigrants.
Um, but with one proviso, I just want people
to keep in mind that some of us are not corporate landlords
and should not be seen as corporate landlords are seen.
Uh, some people are actually going from one Social security
check month, um, on a monthly basis to the next one.
And so when the tenant can't pay,
this puts a tremendous hardship on us when you're elderly.
Alright, so, and I, you know, this is a block,
this is a voting block here in the
state, in the city rather.
And so I am willing to put up with that.
Uh, because, because I have a lot
of connections in the immigration in
the immigrate community.
And in fact, um,
because of what's been going on, I've had to make decisions
with my, my friends that we're not gonna speak Spanish
in public because we don't wanna be targeted.
So it's not like, I don't know what's going on.
I definitely know what's going on,
but I'm just saying that there are people
who are literally living from one rent payment to the next.
And with the property taxes on top of that,
it's gonna be a little hard for them.
I'm willing to make that sacrifice.
I'm not sure everybody can, there are some people I've seen
who are really in a marginal situation who own their home
and, but, you know, are renting out rooms or something
and it's, it's tough for them.
So I just would like some kind of awareness of
that when you are doing what you're doing.
Um, you know, and,
and then, then there are the folks
who own like multiple units
and, uh, have a team that does all the maintenance.
And those guys, those guys go for them. Okay.
I'm just asking. Keep in mind little people like
me. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Anyone else
for this open public comment?
Anyone? Alright, I don't see anyone else.
So this public comment period is now closed. Thank you.
We're going to move to public hearings
and actions, questions, hearing, oh wait.
Oh, sorry. Um, I would like you
to answer if you can, or if maybe the city clerk
or our city attorney at least a couple of questions.
So if the attorney
or clerk wants to handle the,
the last one we received about conflicts X
Yeah, sorry. Um,
I was pressing, I I just pulled up.
I, there's nothing specific that I'm seeing, um,
in the city council standing rules regarding conflict.
Typically, uh, if there is a potential conflict
or a, an appearance, uh, if there's a direct
or indirect pecuniary interest under state statute,
it's normally in the corporation
or the one getting the contract, and that's a 10% threshold.
Um, but there is nothing in the rules
that require the the council
to actually take a vote on raising the
issue, uh, at this point.
Correct.
Okay. Did, maybe you could just repeat that.
Yeah, there's not, so there's nothing in
Pretty plain language. Thank
You. There's nothing in the rules
that require the counsel
to take action on, uh, another counselor raising the a, uh,
for lack of a better word, a conflict,
a potential conflict of interest.
Um, the state statute requires, uh, recusal under
statutory provisions if you own 10%
or more of a corporation or the equivalent.
Um, and so long as Counselor Scott feels as though,
um, was it Scott or card?
Sorry, Scott, like, um, feels that, uh, she can be unbiased.
There's no reason there's no necessity
for her to recuse herself. No.
Okay. That seems clearer. Thank you very much.
Um, did you want to answer some other questions?
There were four questions for Mr. Steinberg.
I'm gonna try to answer two of them
and then I'll have the chief come up
and maybe, um, better answer those two than I can.
And then there's two that he
definitely would need to answer.
So the first question was about, uh, do we
as a municipality have any way to know if it's true that,
um, ICE has been withdrawn
and their numbers are returned to pre ramp up levels?
Uh, I'll just say there, we did, uh, receive information,
um, from ICE
before they had left, um, that they communicated to our, um,
police staff that they were headed out
before the snowstorm arrived.
You all may remember we got the snowstorm one weekend
and, uh, they were headed out before that.
Um, in terms of any way to know if that's true,
I guess I'd leave that to the,
the chief if he has any observations there.
Um, and then in terms of how do, are we,
are we told when folks in, uh, south Portland are detained?
Uh, no, we are not, we're not aware
of any communities that are told that.
And, um, the only re the only resource that I'm aware of,
um, is I believe there's a website,
but you have to have specific information about the
person that you can enter.
And if they've been detained for more than,
I think it's a day or two, then, uh,
in theory will show, uh, where they are.
But in terms of having an aggregate list of you,
you can't like type in South Portland
and it comes up with all the people that were, um,
removed from South Portland.
So, uh, unfortunately, uh, really that information is held
by ICE and not, uh, shared with any of the, um,
of the communities chief.
There were questions about, uh, local law enforcement, um,
uh, people seeking help or protection from ICE
or border patrol agents
or those calls increasing, decreasing
or maintaining similarly as ICE contacting
or border patrol contacting us for help.
Uh, and those calls increasing, decreasing
or, um, um, remaining the same.
Uh, thank you Danaher and your police chief.
There was a question about the number
of calls I think that we received. Am
I right about that? If they're increasing
Yeah. Decreasing.
Uh, no. So we have seen, uh,
we probably handled less than, uh, a handful of calls for,
for service when their operation was, uh, here,
they were here for four days.
You were correct in that, uh, my information.
The Friday night before that weekend, snow storm, uh,
was their last day of operation.
They left that following Saturday morning.
At the time they were staying in Portland,
we did receive one call, uh,
for assistance from Portland PD to assist them.
There were a group, um, that had gone to the hotel
to, to protest.
And so we were, uh, over there to assist them.
We didn't get involved in that.
We were fortunate enough to just be able to leave and,
and that was settled over there by Portland pd.
So, but calls for service here were,
uh, uh, very infrequent.
We had a couple of calls where cars were abandoned as we,
we all know there was some arrests that were made
and cars were left in the street.
And, uh, we have one of those calls
that I remember specifically.
But my information is that that, uh, ramp up
and that operation was done that Saturday morning.
They left before the snowstorm and they have not returned.
So in terms of ca calls from
presumably over the past since that happened, have you had,
have you had any calls from the public
or from ICE asking for help?
No, very few calls from the public. Very few, if any. No.
Okay. Uh, it's my information that they're not here.
Thanks Chief. Any other questions?
We answered all questions. That's it? Yep. Okay.
Thank you very much. Alright, now we will go
to public hearings.
And action. Thank you. Madam City Clerk,
would you read Ordinance 16 please?
Ordinance number 16 25 26 amending chapter 27 zoning
regarding coal storage.
This is the second reading,
first reading pass on January 20th, 2026.
Passage will require five affirmative votes
and this will be a roll call vote.
Thank you, Mr. City Manager, would you remind us
what the ordinance is?
Sure. So the, um, the ordinance, uh,
prohibits large scale, uh, coal storage in the city,
allowing some smaller scale storage, um, which
is primarily intended for households, uh,
individuals or households.
Uh, and that storage can, um, go up to,
but not exceed one ton.
Uh, a lot of this was mirrored on the Portland ordinance.
So this is, uh, in effect, uh, as you recall, a reaction,
uh, to that so
that the storage issue doesn't move from there to here when
that, um, prohibition goes into effect.
So counsel approved the first read, uh,
two weeks ago tonight.
If second read in passes, the uh,
ordinance will go into effect in, uh, 20 days.
Got it. Counselors, have any questions come up
for you on this one?
No, I don't see any. Alright.
We are open for public comment on this item.
Ordinance 16 Cole Storage door.
Can we see any public comment?
Alright, public comment is closed on that item.
What is the wish of our council? Councillor West
Move for passage.
Thank you. Do we have a second?
Counselor, Coleman Councillor West,
Uh, just bringing our policy
and law in South Portland into conformance
with Portland's recent enactment.
I would point out that it's interesting the,
the column from the Historical Society this week is about
coal storage and in 8 18 90,
there was capacity for 20,000 tons of coal
to be stored on the piers in Portland.
Wow. And when we get really, I'm just going a little aside,
but we need to think positively as much
as we can in these dark times that 135 years ago,
would anyone have thought that in the future we would be
banning the storage of coal?
And so it's nice to know that we have made a little bit
of progress in the last a hundred plus years.
Well, thank you Councilor West for that beam of sunshine.
Thank you Councilor Coleman.
Um, just that, um, support this
because coal is, is dangerous.
Um, it affects, negatively affects
and even though there's no there,
it's being called clean coal.
There's no such thing. And it, the dust is extremely,
uh, dangerous for respiratory function.
So we don't need big piles of it.
And I know where it's going in the state of Maine.
I came from that area.
Thank you. Bad, bad, Bad.
Thank you. Alright, any other counselors wish
to speak on this item?
Can we have a roll call? Vote please.
Counselor Coleman No. Yes.
Passage? No. Cold
Counselor Matthews Yesss.
Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West?
Yes. And Mayor Tipton?
Yes. We have a unanimous vote
and we now have a coal storage
or ordinance that matches 2026.
Thank you very much. Alright, we'll move
to action on old and new business.
We had moved the one item from the consent calendar.
So could you please read order 1 48
Order 1 48 25 26.
Accepting the proposal for Sentara for PFML coverage.
Provided that the state approves the transfer
to a private plan, pastor requires majority vote.
Thank you. Did you wanna say something about this
item? Councilor Walker?
Yeah. Um, thank you.
I work for symmetric and I as part of my day job.
Um, I work on the PFML product as well.
And so in that, um, I wanna avoid any appearance of conflict
and so I want to recuse myself from this vote.
I understand the rules as you read them tonight,
but between my employment there, I, I wanna make sure
that both for my employer
and for the residents, that I am transparent
and just recuse myself from the vote.
Thank you. Councilor Walker,
did you want us to talk about this? Thank you very
Much. Yeah, actually I'll invite our, uh,
human resources director, Rob Netto off.
Rob can talk a little about this, um, uh,
money saving endeavor.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Uh, I'm, uh, Rob Netto. I'm the director of hr.
Thanks for giving me an opportunity to speak.
So this is an opportunity to move from the state PFML plan
to a private PL plan,
which the state law auth authorizes us to do.
Provided we have, um, approval from the state
for the transfer to the state, to the private plan,
the state has to approve, uh, our transfer.
The reason that we would do this is, um,
there would be some savings upfront, uh,
under the state plan we're obligated
to pay into this insurance plan.
The PFML plan is an insurance plan that pays folks who need
to take time off, uh, from work.
We have a typical family medical leave plan,
which is unpaid leave.
This is a paid family medical leave plan that allows folks
to take paid leave
or family medical leave that they have to take sort
of like sick leave except it's a statewide plan.
Under the state plan, we have to prepay an insurance premium
into the, into the program.
So you can't file a claim under this plan
until May 1st, 2026, but yet we have to pay premiums.
Now this is different than,
let's say if you had a car insurance
and your car insurance was effective.
July one, you would pay insurance premiums for that plan.
Effective July one.
When you receive the coverage under this state plan, we have
to prepay into the program.
By moving to the private plan, we can avoid four months of
that prepayment, which will save the city a total
of about a hundred thousand dollars to be split
between 50 50 between employer and employee
because the premium is split 50 50
between employer and employee.
The state law allows the city to, um, share
that cost with the employee.
And, uh,
different municipalities have taken different approaches,
but we split that cost 50 50.
So there's savings upfront.
Furthermore, once the plan actually begins on May 1st,
the premium that this private,
that Symetra has given us is a lower premium than
the state premium.
So going forward next year when the plan is operational,
we will save money because we will pay a lower premium than
what would be charged under the state plan.
So there's not tremendous savings there,
but there is some savings.
Okay. Um, I, any counselors have questions
for our HR director?
Alright, I just, I have one question.
You said 100,000 savings that is in this first year
and then there's ongoing of about 15,000 or less?
That's correct. It's about 15,000
for the city. Okay. That's right.
Alright, thank you. Okay.
Um, is there anyone who'd like to comment on this item?
Ah, we do have a commenter on this item.
Uh, Rosemary DeAngelos Pleasantdale, just to say, uh, as,
uh, uh, representative from the school board, the, the,
the school board has, uh,
or the school department, I should say,
has reviewed this issue with the city.
And this is an area
where the school department would join the city in, um,
in, in being part of this plan, there is not a requirement
that we go with the state plan
and there has been communication between
the school department and the city to do that.
So I wanted to say we appreciate that opportunity
and look forward to doing that, uh, on this same issue.
Um, I appreciate Councilor Walker's disclosure.
I, I believe the requirement is
that she remove herself from the deus
and sit in the audience during the discussion so
that she's not, does not participate
and does not, uh, is not present for the vote.
Thank you. So thank you.
Thank you. Parliamentarian DeAngelo. Thank you.
Um, hi. Julia Edwards, Dawson Street.
Um, I should just stay up there
because there's still a lot to talk about tonight.
Um, comments are actually more questions.
Um, if there's time to get those answered,
if somebody is able to do that tonight, um, it sounds great.
Like, yay, saving money. Love that.
Um, my concern is by giving
profit and money
and power over this plan to a corporation,
an insurance company, um, what are the drawbacks?
How is this going to actually impact the individuals who
need to, and,
and will benefit from the passage of, of this law?
Um, it's been a long time coming.
There's a lot of people that need it.
And what are we hurting
and who are we hurting by going this route?
I'm just curious if, if that's nobody great. Wonderful.
Um, but I hear private versus public that I am just,
I would just like to know, um, what that means for the day
to day of our citizens, both in South Portland.
And I'm assuming this will have ripple effects
because we won't be paying into the state system.
Um, what's the ripple effects?
Um, one of the negative ripple effects of,
of this kind of choice.
Um, so I'd like tangible thoughts
or data on that, um, of just like
what the experience looks like for people
who have done this, um, or have made this choice already.
I know the law has not taken effect yet,
so we don't really know.
But, um, it's a question worth asking.
Um, I also wonder if long term
costs are going to go up because that's what insurance does.
So, um, thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Uh, Edward, uh, 90 Road.
I, I was interested to know what did the, um, city come up
with, with what was their total cost for this benefit?
The state of Maine passed.
Um, I can say as a non-public employee,
I didn't have the option
to opt out if I didn't want the plan.
Um, it's interesting,
New Hampshire offered a very similar plan, uh,
and the cost was dramatically lower.
And I know this council has no control over that,
but they went to a corporation, um,
and it was optional people, public
or private had the option to opt out of it.
I can say as, uh, as somebody who pays taxes
and plenty of them in this state, um, I would've loved
to have the option to opt out.
And I think my question is really about what kind
of unfunded mandate do they bill like
this put on this council?
And as the, um, legislature likes to tout
that they're paying 55% towards education
and I recognize that South Portland doesn't get their 55%
'cause we're considered a rich
community, if you will, somehow.
Um, it just seems time
and time again that the legislature throws these mandates
out there, but they don't really think about
what the consequences are long term for property owners
who are paying property taxes.
So that was my only question about the total cost.
Alright, anyone else?
I don't see anyone else public comment on this
item is closed.
One thing I just wanted to comment that I've noticed from,
um, public comment, the word law being used,
I just wanna be clear that the council's not passing
an ordinance right now.
I know we're referring up to a law,
but the council is, um,
accepting a proposal from an insurance company, basically.
So did you want to say more and
or Rob, could we clearly both of us answer some questions?
Yep. I think between both of us, we can, we can try.
Um, the, the law, I guess all I can say about the impacts of
of not staying with the state is the, the law was crafted
by the folks that, um, it, it, it wanted, uh,
the PFML uh, in place, uh, to have an opt out
where if you didn't go with the state, you could opt out
as long as you went with a company that
provided the same level of benefits to folks.
So there, there's no difference
for the employee whether we stayed with the state
or go with a private insurer.
But that plan also has to be approved by the state.
So it's not like we can just go out
and, uh, pick, you know, acme uh, benefits LLC and,
and kind of, you know, hope that they, they do a good job.
These are things that are in theory vetted by the state.
So in terms of the employee, uh, benefits that it's,
it's exactly the same as
what would be received through the state.
Um, and this is a three year contract, so if we find
that at the end of the three year term
Symetra says we're gonna double your rates, uh, then uh,
we can, we can make other decisions.
And I don't know if you want to add anything to that, Rob.
Certainly, I don't know the answer about the
how much this costs the city to Mr.
Cobb's. Um, question.
It's half a percent on our wages because we pay half of it.
The other cost is shared by employees,
so it actually reduces their take home pay
by half a percent a year for, for, um, uh, for buying into.
But I don't know, do you know that aggregate amount?
And is there anything you wanna share about the,
I believe my friends at Cross are telling me
that the aggregate cost
to the South Portland is about $726,000 a year.
So that's the aggregate cost to the city or the program.
Um, or but I
Anything about the kind of the cons
that you thought of, uh, yeah.
As well that you wanted to add that I didn't?
Yeah. As far as risks to employees,
I think the risks are very, very small.
Uh, the city has a very generous,
um, leave package.
We have vacation time, sick time, comp time.
We have, um, short-term disability, long-term disability.
So I, I actually think that for,
for the vast majority of our employees,
this provision is gonna make no difference
because if somebody needs medical leave right now,
they can take family medical, leave an unpaid benefit,
and then they can take sick leave and
or vacation leave along with that family medical leave and,
and, and, and,
and still receive pay while on family medical leave.
So I don't think this is going to have
that much of an impact.
There are other provisions in the personnel policy
that give the manager and myself opportunities
to provide additional leave for people
who are on medical leave who need additional leave if
they've, if they've exhausted their family medical leave
where there's sick leave, there are other opportunities.
For example, there are sick banks
and those are the benefits under the personnel policy,
under our collective bargaining agreements.
There are other ample leave packages such
as a sick leave bank, uh, that benefit, uh, employees.
So I don't think that this poses much of a risk
to our employees.
Uh, there's going to be leave available,
there's leave available right now, and,
and There is a possibility just
to, just to address the point, there is a possibility
that symmetric could come back
and increase our premiums, uh, beyond
what the state premium is.
But I think what we've seen from Symetra
is they see us as a good risk
because they've actually put our premium at a,
at lower than the state cost.
So they see this demographic, this community,
as a good insurance risk, which I think suggests that our
rate with this company is going to be competitive
or less than what we might see under the state plan.
Uh, and so I think there's very little risk.
Thank you very much.
Was that, was that 700,000 number inclusive
of the city and school or is that
Yes, I believe so, yes. Alright.
Are we still able to ask questions?
Hang on for just one second.
Um, I would just say that I thank both of our staff members.
I think they've tried to answer the questions
to the best of their ability.
I think we've heard good information.
Um, I do not think we yet have a motion for passage.
What is the will of the
council? I can't,
I can't ask a question.
Well, I I was going to put the motion out
and then we would have a discussion. Yes. Okay.
I can ask a question then.
Okay. I'll move for passage.
Thank you very much for moving for passage Counselor Pride,
seconding Counselor Matthews.
Um, hang on for one second.
Councilor Coleman, if you wouldn't mind, councilor Pride.
Um, I think the plan sounds like a good one.
Um, and I'm happy to hear that the risk is minimal.
Thank you Councilor Matthews. I'm good, thank you.
Now Councilor Coleman, please ask a
Question. Okay, I
see where that rate,
which is extremely shaved off from the 1% of the state,
we have a guarantee for 29 month rate.
If they should go up, would we be able to join the state
without suffering a penalty?
Would our rate be different?
So the, the rate under Sumatra is
guaranteed for 29 months. I
Saw that We, once we leave the state plan, we cannot
reenter the state plan for 36 months.
Okay. So the, the 36 month period begins
retroactive to January one.
Yeah, the 29 month period with Symetra,
that's when we begins May 1st.
So the risk risk period you're talking
about is three months.
Okay. And I've discussed this with Cross
and it's their recommendation that, that Symetra would,
would be looking to retain us as a client
and would not be looking to increase that rate over
that three month period.
Okay. But the question was, would the state charge us,
would we be able to enter at the same rate if it were lower?
Oh, the state without penalty is what I,
Well, I'm not, I'm not sure
if I understand the question fully.
Would we have to pay more than others if we joined the
state at a later date?
Okay. Um, I don't believe so.
He's shaking his head no. Yeah, I don't believe so.
But the state does have the authority under the state law
to increase the premium going forward.
So if we entered, we'd have to pay,
if we reentered the state plan, we'd have to pay
that higher state premium.
Okay. But that, that
I understand like, like everybody else.
Yeah, I like everybody else.
My question was, would we have to be Okay,
Well that was a good question.
Thank you for asking it. Anyone else? No. Alright.
I think we are going to have a vote on this. All in favor?
And that is a unanimous vote of the folks here.
That six with Councilor Walker recused from the vote.
Councilor Walker, please come join your friends again.
Thank you. Alright, can we, um, have a reading
of order number 1 35 please.
Order number 1 35 25 26.
The Jetport Noise Advisory Committee
for Cassie Moon Residency to fill the recurrent vacancy.
This requires a majority vote.
Alright, did we wanna say anything other than that?
We had an opening on our Jetport Noise advisory committee.
The vacancy was added
to the appointment calendar applications were opened.
Um, we've had one applicant
and um, I believe we're going to ask for a motion
to appoint that applicant.
Councilor West. Thank you.
Do we have a, a second Councilor Walker.
Thank you very much. Councilor West.
I very much appreciate Cassie's, willing to serve
Succinct Councilor Walker.
Alright, all in favor of Ms.
Moon's appointment to the Jetport Noise Advisory Committee.
Eight. We have a unanimous vote. Thank you.
And congratulations.
Now we're going to move to ordinance number 17.
Could you read that Madam City Clerk please?
Ordinance number 17 25 26 amending Chapter 12 housing
regarding a temporary eviction moratorium
passage required majority vote.
Mr. City Manager, would you please take us
through Madam Mayor?
Yes. Oh, I'm sorry. Counsel.
Madam Mayor, my husband
and I own five residential rental proper, uh,
units in South Portland and two separate buildings
because the passage of this ordinance could have a direct
and immediate impact on my income,
I have a financial conflict of interest
and am recusing myself from this matter.
You gonna be alone? Yes.
Thank you. Counselor West. There's
A great seat right over your,
It's warm, warm seat for you.
I had one more thing to say.
Oh, this is a direct financial interest,
which is very distinct from the indirect type of interest
that Councilor Scott has with regard to a general budget.
Thank you for that clarification and education.
Much appreciated. Alright, Mr.
City Manager. Okay.
Thank you Mayor. Counselors.
Uh, so in response to, um, as has been discussed tonight,
the increased federal immigration
and enforcement activity dubbed, um, operation catch
of the day, uh,
and the related economic disruption members
of the public had began, um, seeking counsel in action of,
among other things in eviction moratorium, uh, in relation
to, to folks that either, um, uh,
didn't feel like they could, uh, go into work, uh,
as a result of those activities
or businesses that had shut down
and weren't offering hours to employees.
Uh, so, um,
because of these inquiries, I had consulted initially
with Maine Municipal Association's legal department to see
if such type of, of moratorium was possible.
They gave an initial opinion
and, um, suggested we also checked
with our own corporation counsel, which we did.
And as you'll know in the packet materials, um,
our corporation council, Brandon Mazer,
provided, um, uh, an opinion that yes, um,
council likely can, uh, enact an eviction moratorium,
which would, um, withstand legal challenge.
Um, and just I, I'm gonna summarize and
and butcher, uh, his memo,
but essentially the courts have upheld these types
of moratorium when they're properly drafted.
They're supported by detailed findings
and they're limited in duration.
Uh, all of these, um, the, uh, proposed ordinance, uh,
checks the boxes of it also invokes our home rule authority
granted by the main Constitution
and, uh, uh, chapter title 30 a of, uh, state statute.
However, it is worth noting legal risk can't be eliminated.
This is, uh, in some ways some untested territory.
So there's no, uh, guarantee or black
and white answer that we can do this
or that it would survive legal challenge rather,
based on this guidance, uh, the Mayor Per Council,
rule number four, requests an ordinance be brought forward
for consideration by the council.
Some of the key components as has been drafted, um,
by corporation counsel include the moratorium period
of February 1st through April 30th, 2026.
This is not rent forgiveness, uh, rent remains owed.
It restricts certain notices to quit
and eviction filings during this period.
Um, enforcement, uh, would be by under the ordinance,
city manager or designee.
And it imposes significant civil penalties for, uh,
landlords in violation, uh, of the ordinance
that can be brought by the city.
Uh, just as a reminder what the ordinance doesn't do.
It doesn't cancel rent,
it doesn't regulate immigration policy,
and it doesn't permanently alter landlord tenant law.
Um, as noted by corporation counsel, um, it's, it's,
this is a blanket ordinance
because it's very difficult to tailor this
to only those impacted by ICE operations.
You can imagine the practicality of, um, how the city
or the courts would be able to, um, enforce that,
and that's why it's been, um,
a little bit more broadly drafted.
So, some of the benefits, uh, potential benefits
of this type of ordinance is it does provide short term
housing stability, um, which we know housing, um,
it's like a domino effect.
There's all kinds of other, uh, things
that if someone doesn't have housing, um,
are impacted negatively.
Uh, and that's, uh, related to public health and safety.
Uh, there's a reduced strain on social services if folks
are, um, are evicted.
Uh, that does, uh, put a strain on homeless shelters, um,
and resources like general assistance, uh, looking to find,
um, individuals
or families, uh, um, emergency type of, uh, housing, uh,
helps with economic stabilization.
So workers, um, uh, aren't
that are without a house can continue to, uh, without
continue to be housed, can, uh, continue to go to work.
And it also demonstrates that, uh, this is an issue that,
um, we can react to locally on, uh, a local level.
Some of the risks and drawbacks are
as the aforementioned litigation risk.
This is, um, a novel ice related basis,
even though it's not specific to ice related incidents, um,
or, or a requirement isn't, um,
that someone has experienced that type of instance.
There are the preemption arguments
that state law preempts municipalities
from acting in this field.
Those could be raised, uh,
there could be a financial strain on landlords.
You heard a speaker earlier talk about, you know, especially
for perhaps some of the smaller, um, mom
and pop landlords that are, uh, perhaps almost paycheck
to paycheck if, if they don't receive, uh, rental payments,
which again, this doesn't forgive, but could delay.
Uh, they may have their own issues with, um, being able
to meet mortgages
or, uh, their own, um, personal finances,
uh, market effects.
What does this tell, um, you know, uh, uh, others, uh,
looking to be landlords
or property owners about, uh,
how South Portland conducts, uh, business.
And then precedent concerns.
If every time, uh, you know,
there's an issue in a community,
is the council gonna be asked to enact some sort
of a moratorium?
So, uh, those are potential risks
and drawbacks council should weigh when, uh,
looking at this, uh, ordinance, uh,
enforcement administrative feasibility.
So this is a, um, this is an important topic.
Uh, non-compliant notices to quit.
So, again, for these eviction notices are deemed void
under this ordinance.
And again, there's violations.
If someone does issue that in violation of the ordinance,
that would, uh, we would issue
or we could issue significant fines.
We also may seek conjunctive relief in attorney's fees, um,
for having to proceed with, um, uh, uh, defending, um,
uh, issuing of a violation notice.
The enforcement would be
by the city manager designated this would likely be
designated to, uh, code enforcement.
Um, and this is the very important part.
We don't have a dedicated landlord
tenant enforcement division.
We have a very busy staff.
So especially if there's a large demand for, uh, complaints
that come in for the city to pursue a landlord
that's issued a notice to quit,
we have multiple completing competing, um, workload
for city staff that, um, that frankly will,
will definitely make it so we can't be proactive about this.
But, um, we, there also may be either time delays in, uh,
getting responses to people filing complaints
or other things on staff's plate that will have
to drop off as a result.
Now, if there's only one
or two complaints, that's a different story.
But, um, if there is a big need out there,
there is definitely a limit on staff's ability.
So the other way that this can be, um, used by residents,
uh, instead of, or,
or in conjunction with working with staffs staff, uh,
complaints, uh, in the courts,
they can raise this ordinance as a defense.
And, um, now the court could very
well ignore it and say, that's great.
South Portland has this, um, we're still proceeding.
Or they could say, you're right, the city has an ordinance.
You've issued this notice to quit in violation.
So we're gonna dismiss, uh, the eviction as a result.
But really, again, the effectiveness depends on our tenants
of aware, aware of this ordinance.
And would they bring it up as a defense, um, and,
and show up to court with that defense?
There is, uh, I think it's important
to also note the practical accessibility concerns.
Um, we've heard tonight, and you've heard a lot, uh,
before about the fear
that is out there tangibly in the community, uh, related
to the, um, presence of ice.
And so the, the, the fear of, uh,
essentially outing oneself perhaps, even though again,
the ordinance isn't, um, uh, specific to folks
that have experienced an ICE related, uh, um, uh, uh, issue.
Uh, there may be a deterrent though,
in people availing themselves of this calling the city,
because now there's a record I've called and,
and I'm looking for assistance
because I've gotten a notice to quit
or representing oneself in court, um, because of perce
or the perception of increased vis visibility
may cause some sort of, um, harm
or, uh, focus on that person.
So again, you know, in, in that regard, if it's not used
by certain folks that, that are, um, afraid of that type
of visibility, uh, the ordinance could still serve
as a deterrent, um, more than it's used as an active,
you know, remedy for folks to take advantage of.
Uh, we did try to look at some other
jurisdictions to see what they're doing.
Uh, you know, Minneapolis, uh, Minnesota, Portland, Maine,
they both, uh, requested, uh, statewide action a moratorium,
but didn't enact, uh, any themselves, Los Angeles County.
They declared an emergency in our exploring protections,
but notably we weren't able to find any other examples, um,
in the state or the US where there was, you know,
this ice driven, uh, enacted moratoria on, um, on evictions.
So overall assessment, again,
counsel's decision requires some balancing.
There's the housing stability
and public welfare concerns, uh, versus property rights,
market predictability, concerns the legal defensibility.
You have a good opinion from legal counsel,
but it's not, um, a hundred percent,
you have definitely the administrative feasibility, uh,
and then the practical accessibility of the, uh,
ordinance for those affected.
So ultimately, the question for counsel is,
do you believe the benefits
of this eviction moratorium outweigh the risks
and downfalls, uh, timeline tonight?
First reading, if that gets approved, we'll move
to the second reading on March 3rd,
then it would become effective 30 days after adoption,
and it would apply retroactively to February 1st, 2026.
I do, we do have corporation council here.
That's my high-ish level overview.
Do you want to add anything, Brandon, to, uh,
since you crafted the ordinance,
Um, I'll just, I think echo a couple
of the points you made just to put finer points.
So this doesn't, um, mean
that the city's gonna be marching into eviction court
and trying to defend that really to,
to Scott's point is it will be a potential, uh, defense
for those that having the risk quit filed against them
to say, um, there's this, this ordinance in place.
Um, as we know these, um, a lot
of these individuals are, uh,
not comfortable going into court,
and there may still be default
judgements ruled against them.
Our ability on enforcement is really on those penalties
and finding out, um, that it was done.
So yes, while the ordinance makes those notices
to quit void, again, we're not gonna be, uh, in,
in ev eviction court.
Uh, and again, this, the best we could find, uh, in terms
of, uh, examples really stemmed from the COVID era,
and those were at the, the state level.
Um, so we also took a memo from my predecessor
and, uh, looked at that further.
Um, home rule gives broad authority here.
We hadn't found anything that specifically was reserved
to the state other than the courts
are a creature of the state.
Uh, so that's where a judge may
or may not take this into account.
I, we just don't know. There's no, uh,
due direct examples that we could find.
So the initial research was, can we do it?
Yes, we, I think we can.
Um, but then the other piece was, uh, as Scott mentioned,
trying to draft it in such a way that it was narrow,
but we've, we've struggled with, with that piece.
Uh, so it is, it is a broad blanket, um, moratorium
and the FED process is, is long.
It's not a quicker easy process.
So some of this timing may be complicated.
Yes, we've made it sort of retroactive, um,
but if something was filed in January, it may not be heard
for, for a while.
Um, so those would be o would be likely. Okay.
Um, but then they may not be heard until
May for something else.
So it's, it is gonna be complaint driven.
So, uh, it's definitely, uh, novel
and we've, we've done our best here
and happy to try to answer any additional
questions that, that may come up. That's it.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you for this thoughtful, um,
presentation that is helpful.
I wanted to note that generally on our agenda,
it makes clear when something is a first reading
or a second reading for an ordinance.
In this case, it doesn't say that.
So as you can see, what that means is even if,
or if counsel were to pass this
through on a first reading this evening,
the second reading would not come until March 3rd.
And if it passed the second reading,
then we would have the new ordinance.
But that's how it works.
It's not that tonight's vote would be the, the final,
it would be final if it doesn't pass through first reading.
So, um, counselors, do you have questions?
Oh, and hold on for one sec.
I do believe there are several of you here who would like
to speak to this, and you will have that opportunity.
As I promised, we may have a fair amount
of counselor questions.
First, councilor Walker,
Um, this is a question for the city manager.
What type of staff, uh, impacted the COVID era of, um,
south Portland eviction moratorium of 2223?
Have, from an administrative per perspective?
So Josh, you want to get up
and help with the, the, the, um, rent control, uh, uh,
if moratorium there
because you field a lot of the calls you happen
to recall off the top of your head what the, um, what the,
what the workload there was.
You, you and I both fielded calls,
but you primarily handled those, if I recall correctly,
Josh, assistant city manager.
Yeah, this goes back a little bit of time, so I'm just, I'm,
I'm riffing on memory right now,
but, uh, there were several folks that had reached out
that were, um, in the Red Bank village
that we were working with.
And then, um, outside that very specific, um, area,
um, maybe half a dozen,
and it was just sort of throughout the city, a lot
of it was just questions to clarify the ordinance.
Um, they were trying to determine whether the increase
that they, um, sorry, whether
what, yeah, whether, whether what, um,
this particular situation was, it was, uh, subject
to the ordinance that had been adopted.
And so we were just kind of helping work through
that, um, with them.
I, I don't even want to estimate qu try to quantify the,
the time, I mean hours,
but not, you know, not a full week's worth of work.
I mean, it was hours in the aggregate, a few dozen hours.
A couple dozen hours. Okay. Best guess.
Sorry. It's been a while,
Scott. Thank you.
Thank you. Can I just, I think for a point
of clarification, um, based on my review
of the memo from my predecessor, it wasn't
that moratorium in the rent control didn't,
wasn't actually part of, um, the c state of emergency
that was this, uh, came out in 20 22, 20 23.
So it was post COVID, um, which gave us a little bit more,
um, understanding of why we thought this might happen.
So it wasn't directly all the case law that we found
that I referenced in my memo is COVID related.
Mm-hmm. Um, but that red bank specific one was outside
of the, outside of that timeline for my,
my research. Gotcha.
Can I ask one More question? Yes, please.
I think we should ask questions
and that would be helpful to the folks here
and anyone listening to this meeting.
Thank you. Um, and was there a reason why this is
to either of you, is was there a reason why
we did not exempt small landlords this time?
Like they were exempted from the 20 22, 20 23 ordinance?
So that, that one, as I recall, was we were trying
to craft it more narrowly
because there had been, frankly,
complaints about red bank's ownership, um,
increasing rent significantly.
And so there was, um, so, so that was, um, the, the focus,
it was in reaction to one particular landlord, uh,
that was increasing the rates here.
I mean, there's, there's no reason you,
you could certainly exempt them,
but here the thought was when we were crafting the
ordinance, whether someone's renting from
a large corporation or a smaller mom
and pop, they still face the threat of eviction.
And so, um, you know, absent guidance
otherwise that certain landlords should be evicted,
it was just crafted broadly.
But I, I don't know if it has to be
It. No, we can certainly,
if that's the will of the,
the council, we can, we can look at
putting that kind of exemption in.
It's, it's exactly what Scott said.
We, this came in as directly related
to immigration enforcement
and the type of landlord in that situation.
We, we couldn't figure out how to,
how to thread that needle.
Um, and there was no,
and during the, the 20 22, 20 23 ordinance,
there was additional action that the council was trying
to take with drafting, having time to draft that.
The rent, um, ordinance, we don't have that here.
The moratorium is sort of standing on its own
to address the, the issue.
So, um, I fully admit it is, it is broad.
Um, and we struggled with trying to figure out how to,
to thread that without it's very fact specific
and very personal, uh, for people so open to, to discussion,
but that's why. Thank
You.
Additional questions, counselor Scott,
I am curious if there is any sort of reporting requirement
for landlords when they do file eviction notices
to provide that data or notice to a municipality, the state.
Is there any way, is there an a reporting requirement
and is there any way to understand data for our city as
to the number of eviction notices that have been filed,
say in the month of February?
Um, and,
and just that sort of data, is that available or out there
Sort of, um, not, not easily accept.
I mean, it would be in essence looking at the, um, they,
they typically hold FED hearings on certain
days, uh, of the month.
Um, so it would be going, excuse me, yeah,
Twice you've said FED I'm not quite sure
Everyone know that. Um, force of all
entry and detainer.
So it's, it's the eviction, it's, it's the short hand for,
for eviction hearings, um, which it then the courts grant
the ability to, to evict the tenant.
Um, so short of looking at the docket on those days
and trying to figure out the address, um,
there's no online sort of filing system yet
with, with the courts.
Um, so it's, it would be somewhat labor intensive to get
that there's nothing required to file in this ordinance
for a notice and there's nothing
that requires them even without this ordinance to,
to let the, the municipality know.
No.
My other question, question please if you don't mind,
is just to help those who are not very familiar with this,
if you could provide a brief overview of
the eviction process, some timelines, understanding,
you know, any sort of brief
overview I think would be very helpful,
and to understand some of the services that are available
upon an eviction notice.
I can try my best. It's, um, I
Know that's a big question, not
A world that I'm, and I also fail to note
there are some exceptions in this ordinance.
Um, so that, that would, would fall under a no fault cause.
So, um, if, if the tenant refused, um,
access to a housing unit as required per lease
or their, you know, tenant's doing something to the property
that needs protection, um,
but you would have to give your tenant notice to quit
that have a certain amount of time to respond
or pay the rent and then you have to file in court.
You then get set scheduled for, um, a hearing.
These, these, it takes a while.
Um, once you get that notice though, um, there are some
low income services if you qualify, uh,
pine tree legal services that do help, uh,
with the eviction process, um,
but start to finish for a landlord to actually get
through the process assuming the tenant doesn't cure
and 60 90 plus days. Days,
Yep. Can I,
and I can be a little more detailed
'cause I did this work for a while.
I'm recognizing, so absent a lease, do you mind if I No,
I'm saying please go Ahead.
Okay. Um, absent a lease, which can have language
that differs as to how long a tenant has to be given notice
for when they're in arrears on rent.
Um, for, for tenants at will seven days
after they miss their rental payment,
when they're seven days in arrears, they need
to be given hand delivered a seven day notice to quit.
So that means that 14 days
after they miss their rent payment, if,
if they are successfully hand delivered the notice
to quit the first attempt, then they are,
the tenancy is technically terminated.
Doesn't mean they have to leave,
they go from being tenants at will to tenants at sufferance.
But if you don't successfully give them
that notice in hand on that first day, you have
to make three attempts.
And on the third attempt you can,
and they can, they have to be in successive days,
they can't be two attempts on the same day, um, on
that third attempt, you can post the notice
or put it under their door
and then you have to mail them the notice.
Um, once that's done, uh, now, now they are,
you know, they've been given the notice.
They have the seven days again, you know, it's seven days
to when the notice has to be sent up to three days
to deliver to uh, get them, get it, uh, served.
And then seven days till the notice is effective,
m tenancy is now, uh, terminated.
So now there are attendance at sufferance.
At that point, you as the landlord are allowed
to file a complaint for eviction.
Um, you also have to have that served on them,
which can take longer
because the sheriff has a lot of complaints to serve.
So it could be a week or more
before the sheriff's office gets your complaint served on
the person and that complaint needs to be served 14 days
before a trial date.
Now when, so that, that's gonna be another
three days potentially or more
before they even get served with a complaint.
And again, you know, you 14 days
after that could be the trial or it could be longer
because FED days in Cumberland County or forcible entry
and detainer days, which is the eviction court process in,
uh, Cumberland County are like the second Thursday
and the fourth Thursday
of every month or something like that.
Um, so it could be longer before you even get to court.
Once you get to court, um, there could be 50
to 70 people on the docket
and you are now required if the tenant wishes to,
uh, engage in mediation, you are required to wait till one
of the two or maybe even three if you're lucky court
mediators are available, you have to wait till one
of them is available to mediate your case.
And that could be, you could be there all day
and then wait till the end of the day
and finally see a mediator.
Now if you are unsuccessful in mediation, then at that point
there might be a trial that day
or your case could be held over till the next eviction day.
Now the trial happens. Um, most tenants, um,
a pine tree legal is always there.
They're just there. And
so tenants usually have representation
and not all landlords do.
Um, but most tenants have representation from pine tree
legal, especially those who are
there for failure to pay rent.
Um, and so most of the time it's sort of, you know,
if there's any kind of defect in the notice
that you gave way, way back in, you know, March or whatever,
and we're at an August hearing, potentially maybe,
maybe more like July or June, but,
but you know, if there's any defect at all in that notice,
the judge is likely to just throw your case out
and you've gotta start all over again
because the people at Pine
Tree are really good at their jobs.
'cause all they do is landlord tenant law.
So at that point, um, if you lose
and you're the tenant, if you go to trial and you lose
after having made it through all those things,
seven days later, a writ of possession issue from the court,
the writ of possession is the thing that says, I legally
as the landlord have a right to this, um, this apartment.
It's my apartment, not yours.
I'm sorry, your a tenants, tenants sufferance.
But now I've got to serve you with the writ of possession.
Once I've served you with the writ of possession,
you have 48 hours to leave
or you can be for forcibly removed by the police
if you pay rent any time between
when you were issued the nose to quit and
before the written possession issue.
So you could lose a trial, wait till day six
and pay all your back rent.
And technically you have to pay the costs
of all those things being served on you.
But if you're able to pay all that rent
and all the costs, then the repossession won't issue.
That's it. You have all that time from when you're issued
that to pay all your back rent.
And if you do, a repossession cannot issue under, under law.
So if you fail to pay rent that day, yes, they have
to serve you with the writ of possession.
And then once you're served with the writ of possession,
you again, you have 48 days, 48 hours
after that to vacate the, the residence.
So it it, when, when Attorney Maser says
that there's, it's a long time.
It it's a long time.
Thank. Alright, thank you counselor Pride.
Do we have any other questions? Yes, counselor Matthews.
So I'd like to know a few things I guess.
Um, the first question I'd like
to know is why this never went to a workshop?
So city staff, uh, got guidance from
all the counselors.
My second question is, has GA gone up in the last few weeks?
And my third question is,
how many hours did council work on this?
Can I just ask you on your second
question, has GA gone up?
You mean have the requests for
GA have request gone up?
Alright,
All right. Three questions.
Okay, so, um, why no workshop?
So, um, council rule four says
that the mayor can add items
to the agenda at their discretion.
So that is like a little bit of a short circuit
where the mayor can, um, add items that they feel, you know,
are maybe are urgent
or need to be, uh, considered by the council.
So that's the city manager
and corporation council under the
rules also have that ability.
But, um, but yes, typically things are, uh, done
through the workshop, but the mayor does have that ability,
um, hours spent.
Brandon, do you have a aside?
Not, not on the legal review 'cause I had asked for that,
but on crafting, yeah,
So distinguishing the memo,
drafting from the actual ordinance drafting,
I would estimate, and I I can pull a more specific number,
um, six to eight hours, maybe a little bit more,
um, in totality.
'cause we have the, um, we use the 20 22, 20 23
rent or for more, more tournaments, a starting place.
And I think being the person called mayor in this moment,
I may also owe you an answer to the question
when two weeks ago we passed our council resolution
talking about how this council feels, our city
has felt about treatment of our neighbors
who are our most recent immigrants to Maine
and ice enforcement done not in the cooperation
with our police force
and with people wearing masks, et cetera.
When we pass that resolution a lot, not tons,
but some of the public comment that we heard
and also emails that we received
asked if the council could consider at a local level an
eviction moratorium.
60 days was what was mentioned.
We also, when we passed our resolution, knew
that there had been requests that the governor consider
that at a state level.
And we added that to our resolution.
The information that we had at the time
and that I was sending out to people asking me about this,
people who were writing to counsel was
that an eviction moratorium was a state level decision.
Well then it came up
again two weeks ago that this council,
not this exact council of these people city here,
but a South Portland city council of a couple
of years ago had passed a local eviction moratorium.
And one of the reasons that was given for that was that it
was done under circumstances related to COVID.
When the city manager dug a little deeper
and realized that was not true
and let me know, I asked if that model
of an eviction moratorium was applicable for these times.
The answer that I received was that
we could work with that model.
Hearing that and knowing that a previous council had put
that model in place, it seemed like it made sense
for our council to be able to discuss that in public
in times that feel pretty serious for a lot
of households in our community.
And that's how it came to be a part of
our agenda today.
I will note that the ordinance that we are discussing today
is significantly different than the ordinance
that the former council passed.
In hindsight, perhaps it would've been better
to bring it forward as a workshop,
but that is how it happens to be on the agenda tonight.
And then the, um, question about ga.
So I I don't, so in January of 2025,
so not this past January, the year
before we had 121 applications.
Um, this year we had 94, so it was actually down
a decent amount, but consistent with the prior months
where we had 98 and 99 in February, so far we've had 50.
So we're probably on track for 90 ish.
Um, anecdotally there have been a few calls about, um, uh,
uh, about this issue whether, you know, my my place
of employment was closed
or, um, you know, I I've chosen not to go to work.
The state has given guidance on, uh, on that.
Um, but we haven't, um, I I don't know how many of those,
uh, applications that were processed were related to that.
I, I, I know it's probably
around a handful just from an informal conversation I had
today with our, um, GA director.
If there are no other questions from counselors,
I think we should open this up to public comment.
Alright, public comment on this item is open.
Hi there. Um, hello, my name is Sarah McKee.
Um, I am the executive director
of the Rental Housing Alliance.
Uh, we're an organization that represents hundreds
of housing providers across southern Maine,
including many here in South Portland.
I'm also a local housing provider myself.
I wanna begin by saying that housing providers share the
same goal as this council to keep residents safely housed
and to maintain stable communities.
Eviction is not something housing providers pursue lightly.
It's costly, time consuming, and often a last resort
after all other efforts have failed.
It's important to recognize
that Maine already has a structured legal process
governing evictions.
This process includes notice requirements, court oversight,
and due process protections even within the existing system.
Evictions are not immediate.
The average non-payment eviction takes approximately eight
to 10 weeks a no cause eviction typically takes
nine to 12 weeks.
In many cases, the full process already takes
close to three months.
Adding a 90 day moratorium could effectively
double that timeline.
This is especially significant in a community like South
Portland where the majority of multi-unit buildings are two,
three, and four unit buildings.
These are not large corporations, they're neighbors,
small business owners, and working families.
For many of these housing providers, losing even one month
of rent can create serious financial strain.
A moratorium does not cause mortgages,
property taxes, and insurance.
It simply shifts the financial burden
from one party to another.
A blanket eviction moratorium is not a targeted solution.
It creates broad uncertainty
and a risk in the housing system, which can lead
to unintended long-term consequences.
If the goal is to help residents facing temporary hardship,
there are more effective solutions
that support both residents and housing providers.
One example is Project Home.
A local organization
that has raised nearly $350,000 in response
to recent immigration enforcement.
As of February 13th,
project Home has already distributed over $196,000 helping
to stabilize 95 households in our communities.
These types of targeted efforts directly address housing
instability while preserving the ability
of housing providers to continue to operate.
In addition, the main eviction prevention program, LD 1522,
established by the legislature last session,
is currently awaiting funding.
If funded, it would provide $10 million in each
of the two, uh, 30 seconds.
Next fiscal years, housing providers are not the opposition,
we're partners in providing housing
most live in the same community as, as their residents,
and are deeply invested in the long-term stability
and health of our neighborhoods.
We respectfully ask the council to consider solutions
that support residents while also preserving a stable,
sustainable rental system.
Uh, everyone in this room could help, um,
get this program funded.
LD 1522 if they email the main state legislature,
the Appropriations Committee. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Excuse me. Yes.
If folks wanna comment on this, get ready.
Be ready, let's move it. Thank you so much.
Great. Hi, I am Olivia Westfall.
I live on Hutchinson Street.
I want to begin by thanking each of the city counselors
for the actions that have already been taken.
Thank you for supporting the resolve, uh, 5 25 26 resolution
regarding federal immigration enforcement activity
and community safety and wellbeing.
At the February 3rd council meeting,
this was a demonstration of our city's commitment to speak
and act clearly when conditions arise.
The threaten Community Stability.
Thank you for taking the community comments from the last
meeting and immediately looking into the options
for an eviction moratorium.
I recognize the time, effort,
and risk that went into this work from the city council,
the city manager and the Corporation Council.
South Portland is an incredible place to live.
We have a tight-knit community with neighbors
that are dedicated to supporting one another,
and we have a leadership that listens
and works hard to not only support the people
who live in South Portland, but also
to make the world a better place.
We have seen all of this in action over the last weeks
through community action
and mutual aid response, as well as
through the resolution past
and the ordinance we are discussing tonight.
I'm really grateful to be part of a community
that represents my values.
I'm here obviously in support of the ordinance
of the eviction moratorium.
Through this ordinance, we have the opportunity to continue
to support our most vulnerable
and margin marginalized community members
during operation Catch of the day,
federal immigration enforcement activity,
targeted South Portland's immigrant community across the
city, but especially in
and around large apartment complexes like Red Bank Village,
Liberty Commons, and Summit Terrace, where individuals
and families must pay upon monthly rent in
order to remain housed.
The ice activity in South Portland put our neighbors
in a possible situation.
You've heard many stories already, I'm sure you're about
to hear a lot more stories, um, where they had to choose
between sending children to school and going to work
or keeping their families safe from the,
from the risk of unlawful detention.
Eviction notices were posted this week
and so many through no fault
of their own are not able to pay.
They need time to get support and get back to work,
and a 90 day moratorium can help give them that time.
Passing an eviction moratorium is an immediate
and achievable way to prevent our neighbors from
displacement and further danger.
And as the thorough member memo from Corporation Council
explains, it is within the city's power to act.
Thank you for your commitment to the people
of South Portland in this difficult moment.
Thank you very much. Next. Thank you.
Good evening. My name's Tim McIver.
I live at, uh, 8 63 Story Street here in South Portland.
I'm a property owner myself.
I own, um, one unit here in South Portland.
Uh, I live in the other, it's a duplex.
I own several other units in Augusta as well.
In fact, I just came from Augusta as I'm very hands on
landlord doing a renovation myself.
Um, so I'm one of these small long
and pop landlords with my wife.
Um, I've, for the past few years, I
not only have I not made money doing this,
I cost me tremendous amount of money.
Um, and I drove over an hour to get here just
so I could be here to talk tonight about this.
Um, I was happy to see the presentation
that was put together about this
and I, um, there was a lot of negatives in
that presentation, which I think make the case all
by themselves for not passing such a moratorium.
Um, councilor Pride's, um, uh,
discussion about it, I think points out
what a raw deal landlords get in general, um, you know,
legally, um, when it comes to, uh,
landlord tenant relationships.
Um, so obviously I'm coming here tonight to say, uh,
that I think the council should vote no on this.
Um, I'm also a member of the Rental Housing Alliance,
Southern Maine, and I think it was Tara who just spoke.
Um, they have a lot of talking points
that were sent out in the email, which he just went over.
Um, those are all good points that were made.
Um, but what's missing from these discussions
and those talking points is
what I think is the real fundamental issue here, which is,
um, the right of a person to their property.
Um, the lease that is, um, created
between a landlord and tenant is a private contract.
I, I regard any interference with
that contract would be very inappropriate.
And I include all interference, rent control,
moratoriums laws about notices and when they should be sent
and, and how many days.
And, you know, if they're not correct then
to start the process over again.
Um, all these are great intrusion
into a private contract seconds.
Um, and as I say, I regard that
as inappropriate.
Um, I am as upset
as anyone about the ice actions
that have been happening lately.
Um, I don't foresee having to deal with that personally.
I don't think my tenants will have to deal with that,
but that's not the point.
Um, for me the point is the, uh, contract, which should be
be as supreme time.
Thank you. Thank
You very much.
Hello everyone. My name's Mike Vernay.
My address is 72 Ocean Street, south Portland.
I've been a landlord and property manager in South Portland
in the greater Portland area for 42 years.
I was one of the founding members
of the South Portland's affording housing com affordable
housing committee, and was on the committee
for about 12 years until I resigned a month ago.
Um, I'm also a member of the board of directors
of the South Portland Housing Authority Development Corp
and had have been a member for approximately 12 years.
There. I'm here tonight
to speak out against this proposed moratorium.
One of the major initiatives, initiatives of the city
of South Portland concerning the lack
of rental housing in our city was a commission of a study
that was done several years ago
and it was entitled the Housing Needs
and Assessment Strategy.
This study came to at a cost to the city of South Oil,
tens of thousands of dollars.
And I would respectfully advise all the members
of this council that haven't read it
to please read it in their entirety.
The study came to several specific conclusions to which
are germane to this conversation tonight.
The primary driver of the lack of rental housing and
consequently increases in rent prices in South Portland is
simply due to the lack of housing stock are
the way to increase the amount of rental housing stock is
to make it more attractive for citizens
or investors to invest in the city and become landlords.
The way to discourage an increase in rental housing stock is
to make it too onerous
and complicated for landlords
to operate their rental businesses within the city.
Items such as what we are discussing tonight
where the city is inserting itself into a contractual
relationship between landlords and tenants will dissuade new
and or existing landlords from participating in
the rental housing market.
I would respectfully urge each of you to think long and hard
before voting and imposing this proposed moratorium
to the housing providers of South Portland.
Another point I would like to make is the point
that Scott make and that Scott made earlier on market forces
if new with the, um, affordable housing committee.
One of the wonderful things that we did pass through
was ADUs and the council was made up
of some members at the time when we were pushing it through
that were against it, but it's gone through
and it was very successful.
But if we keep imposing
more restrictions on landlords outside
of the normal state law, IE 30 seconds the city council,
it's not gonna look attractive for people
to give up portions of their home
to possibly make a few bucks,
but for us it's going to, uh, it's going
to increase the housing stock.
So I I'd like you to think about that.
We need to make it attractive here for landlords
or I should say potential landlords
to invest. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Hi everyone. Thank you.
Um, my name is Zenya Pantos and I live on Hall Street.
Thank you so much for allowing the time
to discuss this topic that feels so important at this time.
I'm here to testify in favor of the eviction moratorium.
Um, through my work with early intervention for the state,
I work with a number of families who were impacted
by ISIS presence in our area.
Many of these families stayed home
for their own safety and missed work.
One family in particular stayed home to take care
of their daughter, who they did not feel safe walking
to school and thus one parent was out
of work for over a week.
This family is now extremely stressed about rent.
They're working with several local groups including Project
Home, Presente, Maine
and the South Portland schools to meet their ongoing needs.
But an eviction moratorium would give this
family the breathing room.
They need to both make the money they need to pay rent, rent
and to work with local organizations that can support them.
People are sheltering in place because they're scared.
I'm going into the homes of immigrants on a daily basis.
I spoke with one family last week
who shared their experience
of living in a large housing unit during the ice escalation.
ICE was inside of the building, going door to door,
banging on everyone's doors.
The family shared that they had all been staying home from
work with their high needs toddler
and spent the afternoon hiding in a bedroom hoping
that their door was securely locked.
As the proposed eviction moratorium currently reads,
this would apply to all housing units in South Portland.
Based on my under experience, an understanding
of the housing landscape, if it would be helpful
to add a unit restriction to protect mom
and pop landlords who depend on the income they make
for managing just a few units, I urge you to do so.
Um, and then I had a question about that,
but you already asked it or someone did.
Um, so again, thank you so much
for your service, George City.
I know this is an incredibly complex issue
and I appreciate your thoughtful
consideration of this agenda item.
Thank you very much. Hi, um, my name is Lindsay Maria.
I live on Virginia Ave.
Um, I want to thank the city for doing such a thorough job
of looking into this topic.
I really appreciate it and I'm speaking in
support of a moratorium.
Um, I think some of the recent comments
that I've just been hearing, um, two things.
One is I think there's an implication that this population
that would be affected is actually gonna be able
to access the legal recourse and legal resources, um,
and the process that counselor Pride outlined.
But we've already discussed,
and we've already seen, that this is a population
that doesn't even necessarily feel safe
to use the public service of a sidewalk or a city bus.
It's very unlikely that they're gonna be able
to go through this process.
Um, most likely a scenario could be
that they receive an eviction notice.
It's not clear to them legally what that means.
They're afraid to look into it or get recourse
and they simply think they have to leave.
Whereas a moratorium is a pretty simple message, um,
probably would act well as a deterrent
for these larger landlords.
Um, and it provides both actual practical safety,
but also some psychological safety for people
who are truly being psychologically terrorized,
um, in our town right now.
And then with regard to some of the comments about, um,
landlords, I think we all need to remember that
the proximal cause of economic disruption is ice activity.
So it's not that the tenants are causing a new economic
burden on landlords.
Both of these parties are being affected by ice.
And I don't think that we should have a perspective
of preferentially cushioning one party
and not the other party.
Obviously, we want to take both into account.
Um, and then just my,
my general reasons for, um, supporting this moratorium.
Um, I think we've seen that we have neighbors
that do not feel safe to leave their house.
This applies to people of various immigration statuses,
even in some cases American citizens.
Um, so what we're seeing essentially is that a group
of people that's being affected economically in this period
is actually just any of our neighbors
who are black or brown.
Anyone in our state who is black
and brown, has had a huge economic hit potentially facing
eviction because they were made to feel unsafe.
So we have a situation in our town where the only people
who have an eviction problem are black and brown people.
In my mind, that is completely unacceptable
for any civic unit, for any community.
30 seconds. Um, thank you.
Thank you very much. Very well done.
It's two pages, sorry I didn't staple. That's
Good Evening.
My name is Matt Layton and I'm here tonight
because I own rental property on Cole Street.
I'm a small local landlord who also happens
to live in South Portland.
I am not a large outta state investor. I am your neighbor.
Operating my business comes with a lot of responsibility.
I want to share two brief stories with you
where I issued a notice to vacate to either a month
to month tenant or a tenant whose term was expiring.
This is commonly, commonly referred to
as a no cause eviction
and is at the heart of the proposed moratorium
at the time of these stories.
I own less than 25 units for a period of six to seven years.
That is to say this is a very small sample size.
The first story is a situation
where tenant A accused tenant B of threatening tenant A
with the knife, I believe tenant A
and had a responsibility to provide her with safe
and secure housing to evict for a lease violation.
Tenant A would likely need
to testify in court while she lived above tenant B
for an additional one to two weeks, maybe longer.
The term of tenant B was coming to an end.
And on the advice of my attorney, I issued a notice
to vacate using a no cause eviction was my best option.
For the second story, the main DEA successfully
rated an apartment for drugs.
I knew I had the responsibility to move this tenant out
of the building in order to provide safe
and secure housing to my other tenants.
The town detective was very supportive of my efforts
and told me I was doing the right thing.
But he said, sorry, he can't testify to the raid
because it was part of an ongoing investigation
because law enforcement could not testify.
The drug raid could be considered hearsay by the judge.
It was a gamble to get this tenant out of the building.
I issued him a notice to vacate in addition to other notices
to quit in the event the drug raid was deemed hearsay.
The notice to vacate
or no cause eviction was a crucial backstop in
a complicated eviction.
Tenant turnover is my largest operating expense by far.
It's really not even close.
Landlords commonly use no cause evictions to address issues
or lease violations that require testifying
or are difficult to prove in court.
I thank the council for engaging in response
to federal immigration enforcement.
I share your concern of recent events,
and I'm proud of our community's strong response
where neighbors are helping neighbors
during a challenging time.
I ask the council to weigh the benefits, the costs,
the effects, and the enforcement of the proposed moratorium,
and to consider that as written in the staff memo,
the population most affected
by fear related disruption may also be the least likely
to formally invoke the ordinance.
Thank you.
Is there anyone else? Please be ready
to make public comment
because if I don't see folks coming, I'm going to close it.
So come on down please. Thank you. Good
Evening. My name is Carly
Williams and I live on Hall Street.
Thank you for hearing public comment on this, um, tonight
and for considering an eviction moratorium.
And thank you for the effort that the staff
and attorney have put into drafting the ordinance
and tonight's presentation.
Um, enacting a 90 day moratorium is a concrete
and meaningful step that the city could take
to support our immigrant neighbors, oh,
our immigrant neighbors, and give them time
to stabilize their income without the,
without the added fear of losing their homes.
Similar to the landlord who spoke earlier tonight, many
of the impacted families, all
of the impacted families live paycheck
to paycheck while the escalated ICE presence
was only one week.
The impacts are, and fear are very much still here
as is ice, by the way, just at a deescalated level.
Um, to demonstrate the need, I connected
with a staff member at Project Home, um,
which you've heard about tonight since January 23rd.
They have received 655 contacts
to their emergency housing fund
requesting rental assistance.
Of those contacts, 505 of them have confirmed addresses
and 15% of them live in South Portland.
The vast majority of those are afraid to go to work, um,
fearing ICE encounters
and are not actually eligible for general assistance.
Um, the need has been so high in fact
that they are projected to run out of their funds in 10
to 11 days from today.
Based on my conversation at noon, um, the impact
that you all could have tonight in supporting the most
vulnerable population in South Portland in this very acute
crisis is real.
You could set the precedent for this type
of support across the country,
and I'm actually very honored to have this conversation
as a city council and with you all tonight.
A friend of mine who works in South Portland, um,
schools wrote something for me to share.
She's not here 'cause of break.
Um, quote, I'm connected with a family in South Portland
that I'll keep anonymous for their safety.
They, uh, there are two parents
and two, three young children, all of whom attend,
um, the public schools here.
When ice agents ascended on Maine at the start of the surge,
it was not the first time this family feared being kidnapped
by masked and armed men working for the government.
They're here to escape these kinds of horrors.
Last week, the last weeks have felt familiar.
They fled the United States
and to South Port, to the United States
and to South Portland for safety.
And now they wonder, will we ever be safe anywhere?
They sheltered in place.
Their greatest fear was to be separated from their children.
They found strength and support in their community networks.
Um, church members brought groceries,
children's teachers checked in on them.
Our neighbors drove the children to school.
While the initial danger has
diminished, they remain vigilant.
And now they have these financial consequences.
After working very hard, um, for, you know, many,
many shifts, they've been put in an
impossible, um, situation.
They have applied to community funds, um,
but they are still unable to cover last month's rent.
Um, nevermind the rest of their bills.
One of their bosses, um, told them that he would both comply
with ice if they, if they entered his establishment
and also cut the mom's hours saying
that he has a business to run.
Um, a temporary eviction moratorium is a small
but essential addition to the fabric
of support at our community. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Hi,
I am Shelby Layton.
I live on Stanley Street.
Um, first of all, thank you so much
for putting this on the agenda.
Um, it means a lot
that we brought this up at the last meeting
and then this was able to be on the agenda at this meeting.
Um, and I really appreciate your work
and the work of Corporation Council.
Um, I actually just came from the,
the Cumberland County Commission meeting where I listened
to over an hour of testimony, similar to
what the last speaker just shared about students having
to stay home from school, parents having, um,
to stay home from work, coworkers being abducted,
students being abducted.
And you know, it's, it's hard to listen
to these stories and not do anything.
And I think this is, this is a place
where you all have the opportunity to take a concrete step
that can make a meaningful difference for families.
Um, I've been proud to be part
of this community over the past month
as neighbors came together to support each other.
Um, you know, people delivering each other food,
people walking children to school, that really,
to me is the core of what our community is.
And when I sit here listening to landlords
who are advocating for exactly the opposite of that,
they're advocating for their right
to kick their neighbors out on the street when they're
at their lowest moment.
When I think of someone who says, I live in a duplex.
My neighbor is here on the other side and I'm here.
And what I want is the right to take that person
and say, sorry, you can't afford rent this month.
You have to be out on the street.
You know, I think I'm all for
property rights in some instances,
but I don't think those are the rights we should be
advocating for in this moment.
I think what we should be doing is showing our community
members that we're here for them, that will stand up
for them, and that we'll do what's right
and that we'll support each other.
And that's what this eviction moratorium would do.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. May I
start my talk? Please?
Yes, We're
Ready. Ocean
Street. Um,
I'm just gonna talk in bullet points,
not this long narrative bullet point number one.
I think, you know, we're trying to achieve here
a situation where we don't put people on the street.
We don't want that. My mom owns a 12 unit building,
it's her retirement.
And the last six years had one eviction.
It was a horrible eviction. The unit was a disaster.
We spent a lot of money having to fix it up.
This gentleman who spoke about no cause eviction,
you can evict on nuisance.
You've got a couple of,
you've got someone in the building who's maybe stealing
packages, um, causing nuisances.
Sure. However, it's very difficult to move forward on that
because you need the tenant
and tenants in your building to come in and testify
and have a hearing and you're taking, uh,
testimony from all these people.
You just bring a no cost and you clean up your building.
You, it's a real delicate balance keeping these buildings in
in tune number two,
I just hope Scott Belli doesn't start salivating at the idea
of collecting this civil penalty.
The average rents $1,500 a month, let's say in South Paul.
That's an $18,000 penalty
for just getting the notice to quit wrong.
Maybe by two words.
So I'm asking that we have, if this passes
that the city attorney provide us with a notice to quit,
a model that, uh, we can use so
that we don't get fined $18,000.
Next, the moratorium, as I understand it,
there are no fault causes.
And as long as you go forward
with the no fault causes cited in your, um, notice to quit
or your complaint, you can still move,
move forward with the FED.
Correct question. That's a question.
And I think we all feel the same,
but it's a matter of how do we get there?
Do we put this on the shoulder of the landlord
or do we do this as a collectives?
Uh, uh, you know, members of a, of a community
where we fund the rent through a pool, an asset fund,
some cash fund, 29 seconds.
Um, so I think the landlords,
if they don't pay their taxes, what happens?
City's not gonna come in
and show sympathy on a foreclosure, on a tax lien.
If it doesn't get paid, they're gonna throw the,
the property owner out.
Um, let's see. I had some other, oh, another point.
Real quick. Seven seconds.
Uh, city council, it says here,
landlord proves the existence
of the such reason at any evidentiary hearing.
That sounds like when you show up at FED court,
you actually have to go to hearing and prove your case.
Okay. I'm out of time. You're
Done. Thank you.
I'm done. Or am I just out of time?
I think you're out of time. Okay.
Mad mayor counselors, I'm Sam Sherry.
I'm an attorney. My practice is in Portland.
I'm here tonight for my mom
and pop landlord client, which is Soyer Street, LLC.
They own a handful of units in South Portland.
I represent landlords every day.
My clients and I take a lot of trouble
and a lot of time to work
in a constructive
and respectful way with the people who we are engaged with,
including tenants who are delinquent
or who are not complying with the terms of their lease.
My clients and I are aghast to see
fascism in the streets
of our state and of our country.
And we are asking you to keep your eyes on the ball.
The ball is fascism.
Fascists don't care if you're a tenant.
They don't care if you're a landlord.
They don't care if you're anything except
obviously a brown shirt.
And if you're not obviously a brown shirt,
they're gonna hurt you and they're gonna shoot you
and they're going to jail you.
And an eviction moratorium doesn't focus on that.
That's the job. Keep up the were,
there are a couple of really weird things in this ordinance.
For example, at least half of eviction cases,
the tenant doesn't show up.
What that means is that
because this ordinance requires a testimonial hearing,
the landlord gives a notice.
It's a good notice. They go to court, it's good.
Notice the tenant walks out the door
before the case is called.
It's a bad notice, retroactively for weeks back.
Similarly, the landlord
and tenant in every case get told by the judge,
go out in the hallway and talk this over.
How many times did we hear this counselor? Pride?
Only all of them.
If you reach an agreement, it's not a testimonial hearing.
And 99% of evictions aren't. The notice is good.
The hearing is good. Second, the agreement is wonderful.
The notice is now bad,
and the landlord is facing the loss of a full year's rent.
If you're going to enact this ordinance,
which I hope you won't,
and my clients hope you won't, in section 12, 6 0 3
and Peren three just ended at moratorium
and eliminate the requirement time for a
testimonial hearing, which works
to the detriment of tenants.
I'm happy to answer your questions
or you can tell the lawyer to sit down.
I think for now we might go for option two.
I found what you said interesting.
But you'll be here, I guess, if we want to question you.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. Thank you.
Anyone else have comment? Thank you.
Hello, Ann. Julia Edwards, Dawson Street.
Um, I echo a lot of
all of the comments made, um, by those
who are speaking in favor of the moratorium.
Um, and I just wanted to add a few more thoughts
and some questions.
Um, it would be great to take a step back,
everyone in this room and anyone watching, um,
and those of you at the Deus, um, please take a step back
and think about the balance
of power here that we're talking about.
Um, and who these laws, you know,
war stories about evictions, it's hard,
but God, aren't you privileged to be able to own property
and have the opportunity to leverage that
for the betterment of your life?
We're talking about people who do not have that privilege
for a variety of reasons.
Um, and a lot of the stories that I'm hearing,
and I work in this field, so I know, um, a lot
of the stories I'm hearing sound like they are stories from
like normal times.
These are abnormal times.
These are the opposite of normal times.
So while I respect that, it's gonna be hard for a lot
of people, um, guarantee it's harder for not those people.
So the rules that are in place, um, I'm glad they're there
to correct and imbalance, um,
and protect people's rights, thank goodness.
Um, So my questions are,
are thus with that in mind.
Um, one, is there an opportunity for the city to
provide in addition to this moratorium, um, some additional
relief directly to citizens?
Um, we have channels set up to do that.
Um, we can't do it all.
I say we, capital w not admitting anything.
Um, but can the city also provide
some, some sort of relief to offset the pain
and fear that the landlord
population is going to experience?
Um, in addition to the pain
and fear that our neighbors are experiencing, um, to,
has the city, does the city have a history
of being a red line city?
I would like that to be researched and maybe, you know,
or don't know right now, but, um, maybe get a sense of
how we got to where we are.
Um, I believe that the zoning
and the design of the city is very much
purposeful by design.
Maybe not with nefarious motivations,
but I'd like to know, um, about the city
of South Portland's history, um, with redlining.
And third, um, I would like to know if you vote, just so
that we all can understand, if you vote for
after this first reading, um, is there an opportunity
to make any amendments at the second reading,
or is whatever is decided tonight if it passes forward, is
that the final version?
Just so we understand the process here.
Um, and I'd urge you
to pass the first reading if we can get some more
information and make some changes, um, to satisfy everybody.
Thank you.
Sorry, I was a landlord once.
I had a property in Bridgeton,
and I can tell you, you that my head Edward
98 Ram, I apologize.
I had a property in Bridgeton, had a long term tenant, um,
had a need to sell the property,
brought my tenant the notice to quit.
Uh, they were month to month tenant
and, uh, gave it to them.
Found out it wasn't served correctly, called a lawyer.
The lawyer called the sheriff, and the sheriff delivered it.
And roughly speaking, 60 day later, my, my attorney
and li tenant went to court.
Meanwhile, I was not getting rent,
my property was being destroyed.
I can show you plenty of pictures here.
And it took about 120 days to get that tenant out
while I didn't get any rent.
And while I made my mortgage payment on that property
and paid my property faxes along with it.
I, I guess my question regarding this mon, um,
this whole situation here is, let's say that in July,
Donald Trump wakes up at three in the morning
and says, you know what I'm gonna do, send ice back to May.
Are we gonna bring it back if we just
continuously just gonna bring this back?
And basically, I mean, really violate what is known
as contract law.
And, and I just kind of think,
It seems like at some point in time people should
have the agreement.
What's written on the agreement is the agreement.
This is a broad based for any tenant in the city,
has nothing to do with whether you're here legally,
not legally, it doesn't matter.
Any tenant can basically say, I'm gonna stop paying rent
for six months and then I'll slowly pay back.
And most landlords, I can tell you don't want
to miss any rent, but they also don't want to go
through the hassle of trying to replace a tenant either.
And so, I mean, if we pass this
and then Donald Trump police up at three in the morning in
July and says, let's send ice back to Maine, I don't like
how things are going on down there.
Are we back in the same part?
Are we back in the same point again
where we're gonna do this again and again?
And I wonder on regarding the, the,
the attorneys thoughts about
what the possible legal challenges are to this.
Is he willing to work pro bono?
If he loses the case, is the city manager willing
to stop getting a portion
of his salary if we lose this case?
Because I know who's gonna end up paying for it.
And I'm standing right there.
I'm not alone, obviously,
but we're all sitting in this room or watching at home.
It won't be, you know, the, the attorney
who takes a cotton pay, it won't be Mr.
Marelli. I like you Mr. Marli, don't get me wrong.
But you know, it won't be those
people who take the cotton pay.
It will be us who pay for it if we lose in court.
And I don't know if we, as the city should be the first 30
seconds in the nation to take on this.
Let the state do it. Let a judge do it,
not counsel. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have anyone else who wants
to make public comment on this item?
Alright, come on.
Thank you, Rosemary Angels, pleasantdale.
Um, so I, I wanna say
like a lot of people in this room, I am, uh,
delivering groceries every week I've been notarizing,
uh, documents for people.
And every morning at 5 45, my alarm goes off
because I drive a friend to work
who isn't safe to drive himself.
Um, and,
and someone said to me, um, well, isn't there a bus?
But that, that's exactly the point, isn't it?
That he's not safe to go out in public,
he's not safe to take a bus.
He has a car. Um, but every morning when my alarm goes off
and I sit on the edge of the bed
and think everything from, I'm too old to be doing this,
I think, uh, I'm privileged.
Like I'm privileged. I can get up, I can drive him to work.
I'm not fearful. I'm not the one who's worried
that I'm going to lose my apartment
or that my kids are gonna be taken from me,
or I'm gonna be taken from my children or any of that.
Like, I have privilege basically
because of nothing I've done on my own.
But just because my skin is white, that's all.
Like, I just don't have brown or black skin.
And that saves me.
So, um, one of the previous said, um,
well first of all, if you, if you were
to exempt small landlords, for example, you negatively
and unfairly affect the people who happen
to be renting from a small
landlord through no fault of their own.
I mean, so, so that, that creates an, an, an unfair
and unequal situation that I think,
um, makes no sense.
But a previous speaker said this is just
to give them breathing room.
And that that's what it does.
That that's what's needed, is with everything else
that they're concerned about, with everything else
that's going on in their lives, the last thing they need
to be worried about is that they're going to get evicted.
Like, think about that.
So, um, as Julia Edwards said,
these are not usual times.
That's the point. It's a chance for all of us
to give a little to consider that your hardship
as a landlord is like my 5:45 AM alarm.
30 seconds. Okay? It's a privilege.
It's a privilege that you own this property.
So I have a couple questions that I'll ask quickly.
Um, what would be the, what,
what would be the timeline for people
to have to pay back their rent?
Because as the city manager said, this isn't,
this isn't going to eliminate anybody's
need to pay the rent.
Um, and if you, uh, can we notify the courts
or how are we going to notify landlords if you do pass this?
Which I hope you do. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Carol and Nihon. Dawson Street.
Just one quick question for the council to consider.
Given the extraordinary circumstances,
can the city set up its own eviction prevention fund?
Thank you.
Anyone else on this item?
Counselors, Pedro A Vazquez, uh, speaking about capacity
as the chair of the South Portland Human Rights Commission.
Again, an advisory group to this body.
Simple recommendation from, from the Human Rights Commission
pass a 60 day temporary eviction moratorium.
That's it. Right now, as you've heard,
families in our city are staying inside
because they are afraid.
They're afraid of being detained.
They're afraid of being separated from loved ones.
And because they're staying home, they're losing income
and falling behind on rent.
That's how housing instability begins.
Not with bad choices,
but with fear, with uncertainty, with a crisis
that people did not create.
And when eviction happens, the impact spreads very quickly.
Children lose stability. Schools feel it, shelters feel it.
Our city feels it. A short moratorium is not a radical step.
It is a pause, a moment to prevent harm before it happens.
60 days to keep families housed.
60 days to connect people with resources.
60 days to avoid turning fear into homelessness.
This decision that you are taking
is not about national politics,
it's about local responsibility.
The question tonight again, is very simple.
When families in South Portland are scared
and vulnerable, do we create more instability?
Or do we create breathing room?
Housing is more than a contract.
It is safety, it is dignity.
It is the foundation that allows people to work, learn,
and participate in our community's life.
A temporary moratorium says that our city understand this,
that we lead with compassion and with common sense.
You have the ability tonight to prevent avoidable harm.
Thanks.
Anyone else on this item?
I don't see anyone else.
Public comment on this item is closed.
Thank you so much, everyone who has given us comments. Mr.
City Manager? I believe there are many questions,
and I don't mean that just existentially.
I mean it in this moment.
Mr. Notice, I only got part of, um, uh, you,
you had a question about notice to quit
and I didn't catch the first part of it.
Can you just restate that for me? My apologies.
I like you too, Mr.
Elli, despite whatever I said I meant did a different way.
So anyway, under section 12 dash 6 0 3, okay,
there it's three parts.
There's a notice to quit.
Paragraph one talks about the notice to quit.
Paragraph two talks about the complaint.
Paragraph three talks about a judgment.
So as I understand it, my question is that, um,
you can still proceed with an FED so long as the
notice to quit
and the complaint contain the no fault,
the no fault items listed.
Uh, in
You talking about the exemptions 12 0 2 12 6 0 2, the,
the exemptions that are listed is that, yeah,
it doesn't really say no fault cause means
existence of any of the following.
It's like a, uh, you know, B-C-D-E-F.
So as long as you have one of those listed in your com uh,
notice to quit and or complaint.
My question is, um, are you meeting the,
are you in compliance with the, uh, ordinance
and can you proceed and go forward with the FED?
Is that clear or not? Gotcha. Or did I make it worse?
Brandon, you good with that? Do you have, uh,
I, I think so.
Um,
So you feel clear on the question?
Can the gentleman sit down?
Yes. Thanks.
Thank you very much. And if I butcher it, Mr.
Notice, feel free to, so under, um,
12, 6 0 3,
and maybe it's worth, um, spending a little bit of time
'cause I think there were a few other misconceptions.
There's, um, so 12 6 0 3 lays out the moratorium period,
um, and during that moratorium period,
which will be retroactive to February 1st
through April 30th.
So it's, it's really 90 days, uh, which was,
um, drafted that way.
Given that this is a, a first read that the timing, so,
and then during that period, um,
the moratorium does allow some filings of
evictions if it's for no cause, which is defined under
that section above, as Mr.
Notice stated. Um, so it's, uh, 12 6 0 2.
They, we didn't number them specifically,
but that's the definition section whereby, um,
a no fault cause means any of the following, which is
statutory under 6 0 0 2 1, um,
which I can, I was pulling up.
Um, which allows for causes of, uh, for seven day notice
of termination of tenancy.
And they have a number of listings in within that section.
Um, and then there are the additional, uh, requirements,
and we can go through them specifically,
but, um, tenants refusal to provide a landlord with access
to a housing unit as required by the terms
of a lease rental agreement.
Uh, tenant's actual
or attempted assignment of any rights under the lease, um,
under the terms of a lease
or rental agreement subletting, uh, intend
to occupy if the individual owners intend
to occupy the housing unit.
Um, the landlord intends
to withdraw the housing unit from the residential market
for a period of not less than 12 months.
So it it goes through age.
Um, and I don't know if
we'd have to go through each one of them.
Um, so there are instances where a no car, where a,
a filing can, can take place.
This prohibits delivering a notice
to quit if it's for any other, if,
if it's not falls within one of those definitions.
Does that address, that answers my
Question. Thank
You. Yeah.
Okay. There were questions about can the city set up funds
for landlords or for tenants?
Um, I would just give the short answer yes,
but, um, it wouldn't be quite that simple.
There'd be a lot of questions, but, but yes.
Um, timeline to pay back rent.
So effectively during the moratorium period, um,
the landlords would not be, uh, able to issue that notice
to quit, but once the moratorium was up
and rent was still due, then they could begin that process.
So May 1st, I think, as it's crafted.
Is that correct, Brandon? Or is it seven
days after that, or how did
Well, it, it's, it's sort of a hard question.
So re as, as you stated, rent is still due.
This just prohibits.
So once this expires, May 1st, that process can start, um,
for the, for the eviction process if they
haven't been paying rent.
So there's no timeline within this ordinance,
and there's no real way to enforce rental payments
within our ordinance.
It just puts a defense on the line
and puts a, uh, an enforcement mechanism in place
for the city, uh, to, to stop at least the process
of an eviction, um, during that moratorium period.
So we're not giving any sort of grace period.
If, if, if those individuals have stopped paying rent,
that would be more than likely a violation
of either a lease or at will.
And the process could start May 1st.
Okay. Okay. So, uh, notifying landlords, uh,
how we notify, um, I, I have to double check,
but last time we were able to, I believe, get a listing of,
um, landlords that the ordinance applied to
and send out notices.
So we would do something similar, um, in this case.
Um, then the other two questions I had were, if the,
if voted on tonight, is there an opportunity
to amend a second reading?
Yes. But that would then trigger another second reading if
it's a substantial change
because, um, you have to notice what the council's voting on
so that we push it, uh, the second read to March, uh, 17th,
19th, 19th, because we're not meeting on the 17th.
Right. Um,
and then does the city of South Portland have a
history of redlining?
Um, I, I don't,
I can look into further whether the city itself does.
I know that, um, uh, the, the,
the Homeowners Loan Corporation from the 1930s did do some
of that redlining where they listed neighborhoods.
Um, they gave them the, the rankings of, um, the grades
of security A through D
and it, it was kind of targeted on Jewish,
Catholic immigrant communities, Polish, Italian, Irish,
as well as black residents.
And there was segregated housing, at least at Red Bank
where, um, uh, black communities were, um, made
to live on Powers road there.
Whereas the other, uh, workers, um, uh, lived in,
in, in the rest of the Red Bank area.
But, uh, I don't, I'm not aware
of anything specifically from the city.
Uh, if I come across anything, I can certainly update folks.
I think those were all the questions.
I have one more question. No objection.
You had the timeline to pay back rent,
and you had how notified landlords, so I get both of those.
Yeah. Yep.
I only heard one question from, from you, Phil, that,
that corporation council back
The transcript.
Can I, Madam Clerk?
I am Madam Mayor,
Mayor, I don't have a full brain
Anymore. Well,
that makes two of us.
You have one question you felt was not answered. No,
I know. I asked a question
about can we have your, the City
of South Poland has a wonderful
Housing website with the forms listed
for landlords for tenants.
It's beautifully balanced, it's well done.
And I had asked if the city attorney could provide
that form for us.
You did ask that. And, uh, yeah,
because we don't want to make a mistake
and get fined 18,000 bucks.
Alright. Yes, I remember that also. Thank you. Thank you.
And the answer is
There's nothing that I can, so there's,
I think a distinction here.
Um, whether or not it's effective for an FED proceeding, uh,
we can't provide that.
Our, our ordinance just requires
that when they file the notice to put
that it at least lists the, uh, for cause reason.
Otherwise, it would be in violation of the, the ordinance,
whether or not it's perfected by the courts or,
or that there's, uh, I I can't put
that out there and guarantee it.
And then there was a question for Mr. Cobb,
if this happens again in July, if there's another surge, uh,
would this ordinance come back?
And I would just say there's nothing that triggers that.
It's certainly something the council could consider.
Again, there's nothing in here
that triggers another moratorium if ice
activities ramp up again.
Alright, thank you very much
and very many thanks to all
of you who've made comment and ask questions.
Um, at this point in time, we would usually ask
for a motion from counsel Before we get there,
I myself have a question.
May I ask that? Is that okay?
Um, it's for our city attorney.
Um, why did you recommend that the moratorium be 90 days
and would it be possible
before a first read if it was the wish of counsel to amend
to 60 days?
So, and I was,
In terms of the timing,
because this did not come forward as an emergency
by the time and if there was a, a me, if it went
to an additional to meeting for whatever reason,
the 60 days even on best case scenario, would the,
the ordinance would only be in effect for,
it's really March 30th, so it'd be 10 days.
So yes, we can certainly do it,
but it's, it's making enforceability
and workability a little bit tight.
Um, and we, we can pull out the specific date,
but that's the reason why there was some discussion
about April 30th.
We back dated February 1st. That's, that was 90 days.
I know there was some discussion at
that first meeting about 60 day in
terms of some of the public comment.
Um, but the 90 day really came out of trying to figure out
how to make the timing work.
Okay. So if there was a, if this passed the first read,
if it passed the second read on March 3rd, then 20 days.
20 days. So we're on March 23rd
and 60 days would end on March 31st, approximately.
Yes. Alright, I understand that. Thank you.
Alright. All right. Um, I think I would like to know
what the wish of our six council members is,
or at least one of them.
Yes. Counselor Walker. Move the passage.
You're moving for passage.
Do we have a second, uh, second that
we can have a discussion
or we can sit here and stare One night?
Councilor Walker, move for passage. So
I expected you To give Oh, I'm sorry.
Yes, I, you're right. I'm, I always, I skipped that.
Councilor Walker, please.
So I've thought, I thought a lot about, um,
this ordinance when it came forward
and I, I am supporting it.
Um, let me start by saying that,
but I have some concerns about it.
And my biggest concern is that
because of the way that it's structured,
because it has to be so broad that we are potentially doing
more harm than good,
because also there is no monetary way that we can
help keep these people in their homes.
Um, I had lots of conversations with community members,
with different organizations that have provided support.
I know that, um, project Home as, um, one
of the residents mentioned is gonna be running out
of money soon, even with the vast amount of funds
that they've raised, which is, is phenomenal.
They've raised almost $350,000.
Um, with rents being over upwards of two, $2,000 a month,
that's only gonna serve less than 200 families in the
entire greater Portland area.
So there, right now there is a larger need than,
than private and, and non-profit resources can meet.
And I do agree that the moratorium gives our
most vulnerable residents, residents breathing room.
Um, there were some things tonight that I just wanted
to echo because I thought that they were, they were just
so well put, um, by our community members.
And I made stars and I lost them. Oh, um, one that Mr.
Vasca said about economic stability
and community stability go hand in hand.
And I know that you were talking about the microgrants,
but I, I just, that really hit home to me.
And I feel like because these residents that we are looking
to protect are here legally.
They are working, they are trying to be, um,
positive members of our society that, you know,
their economic stability is, is threatened and
therefore our community stability
as a whole is threatened as well.
Um, I don't wanna keep going on and on,
but there was, there was many
other comments that were made tonight.
Um, the only thing that I would ask, and,
and I really, I
don't, I hear Ms.
Angeles's, um, concern about if we,
if we exempt small landlords, then we're,
we're potentially passing the problem on to, um, residents
who are renting from small landlords.
But is that something that we as a council should consider?
So that is just a question. Sorry.
That was, thank you very much, councilor Walker.
Um, I guess I am the second, so I will say
everything that Councilor Walker said, plus I would like
to say that I wish the state was coming up
with more solutions.
I wish the state was coming up with money
because it's inescapable
that money is actually the solution.
Um, and I think when some folks here have said, well,
we'd like you to the council to put the moratorium in place
because it would buy time, they mean buy time for
tenants to get some money together so that at the end
of the, a potential moratorium they could pay
the state's LD 1522, which, um,
did establish the eviction prevention program as, um,
I believe your name is Sarah.
Yes, you are Sarah McKee of Rental Housing Alliance.
Let us know. Um, unfortunately, the fund is unfunded.
It's a nice big cookie jar sitting there with no cookies
and they are not accepting any applications at this time.
So this fund that a lot of people worked very hard
to establish at the state level
and which when it had money was shown to reduce evictions
by at least 25%, um, when we need it right now,
it doesn't have any money in it.
So if you feel like writing to some legislatures
and writing to members of the appropriations
committee, she's right.
Please do that. That's a bit of a tangent.
Um, like Councilor Walker,
I feel like our council is somewhat in a quandary in saying
we, we, I think all of us too, a person understand
that our neighbors were unfairly
and economically harmed and traumatized.
And as we have heard, it didn't just stop
because they're still afraid
and they've lost trust in our institutions.
It's awful.
And yet here we are considering whether,
as others might phrase it, that harm
maybe is a more important thing
to consider than potential harm to
landlords in our community.
And so, you know, I've, I've thought often
that sitting here I'd like
to have a magic wand, a crystal ball.
I don't, but at this point I do.
I do wonder if Wand
pass a first read would get us time to
maybe make some amendments
and changes that would make this make more sense
for the council to pass it as a second read,
or what some other options could be to us.
If this doesn't pass as a first read, um,
what options do we have as a council?
Is there an order perhaps in our future that would have
some that would be somehow helpful?
And I'm struggling, but helpful in saying that both our city
and our landlords would be asked
to work extra hard in these extraordinary times to make sure
families have their homes, their, the foundations
for the jobs that we hope they will go back to, in part,
to earn the money that is owed
and for children to go to school
and for people to go to medical appointments, et cetera,
to have life, the life that most of us in this room enjoy.
I feel like I've forgotten something.
I guess what it has to, the thing that I've forgotten
as an element that's out there is whether our state also in
being more helpful could get more money into our,
the municipality's general assistance funds
and how that might be helpful to tenants also.
But I don't think we can answer that right now.
And I've not heard that's happening at the state level.
So anyway, um, counsel,
we will, in a soonish way, vote Councilor Scott.
Thank you, mayor Tipton and Councilor Walker.
Um, I, uh, all of us have thought a lot about this.
Um, and I, I am currently not in favor
of a moratorium and I'll provide my reasoning.
Um, this is a horrible activity
that our federal government has brought on our cities
and towns across the United States.
It is awful. It is despicable. There are no words.
I believe that we as a city need to find a way to right
that wrong for the citizens that are scared and afraid
and not able to live their lives across the board.
And I feel that this moratorium shifts that burden
from one sector of the population
to another sector of the population.
And it is not appropriate for us to judge whether
or not one sector is more harmed by this
or another sector might be,
or who might be the appropriate ones to cover this.
So I think my general principle is that we as a city
should support across the board writing this wrong.
And that it's not appropriate for us to sort
of pass the buck to a different part of the population.
I would support, and I
would have appreciated this being a more workshop
discussion, but I would support figuring out a way
for the General Assistance Fund to have some money,
a process to provide funding to people
who are concerned about their rent
or losing their homes just as nonprofits.
And I think a lot of private citizens have done directly.
Um, that's something that I would get behind every day
of the week, 24 7.
I think that a moratorium is just not the right way to go
and not sort of a surgical helpful approach
to deal with this problem as we have it.
I, I apologize if that was not as articulate
as I can make it, but that's where I am.
Thank you very much, councilor
Coleman, did you want to speak?
I I really do want to, um,
stress that the city
of South Portland has the largest amount of women
who are living in poverty.
A lot of our small landlords are women
who supplement their very meager social security
with rental properties.
Women make less than men.
Women are in the workforce less than men.
So therefore their social security does not
even cover expenses.
And I really heard what lawyer, uh, Sam,
I put a star next to your name Sherry,
I believe it was from Portland.
Yes. And I urge everyone to call Senator Collins.
I got to talk to a person today, which gave me more than two
and a half minutes because she is the chair
of appropriations
and she voted to continue funding at a higher rate
to Department of Human Services.
And I, even if ICE leaves here, we are a border state
and CBP is here all of the time.
And what they were doing here was unlawful,
unconstitutional, and meant to terrorize.
And I know they hate the word fascist,
but if you look up the definition, that's what this is.
And that's where we have to place the responsibility
of people who can actually stop this.
And that is the Senate. And so call call every day.
And if you get a person,
do your whole laundry list, speak slowly.
'cause they're supposed to take notes other than that,
get your short little thing in.
'cause you got two and a half minutes. I call every day.
I sleep better. Okay. This is awful.
This is awful for everyone.
And I do recognize it's the color of my skin
and also that I'm female, that I'm less than a threat.
But I got a sense I'm on some sort of terrorist list.
'cause I call every day and some days. Yeah.
And some days I say, you know, it's time
to do the right thing.
We have Margaret Chase Smith as an example
of speaking truth to power.
And we, this is your opportunity to make history.
And right now, lady, you're on the wrong side, so that's
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Councilor Coleman.
Um, just to clarify, it sounds like you are,
I just can't do a moratorium knowing
that the eviction process just as is goes for months.
Okay. And then to, to place the stress on both areas.
Thank you for c for that clarification.
Did you wanna say anything? Counselor Pride
or Counselor Matthews?
Sure. Um, I'll try to be brief.
I think one of the biggest problems with this moratorium is
that it doesn't really solve the problem in front of us.
I mean, the problem in front of us is that, um,
we have a sector of our population
who were forced to stay inside.
And rightfully so.
You know, they had a, a legitimate fear of
unlawful deportation being taken away from their families,
being shipped to other states,
separated from their community.
Legitimate fear of all of that happening.
And it was horrible. But if we stop them from being
evicted, we're not fixing the rent problem.
And we're not sure we're going to fix the rent problem.
Can't do that. And not only that,
and I understand, I understand that if you're a person
of color in this community, you are
absolutely targeted by this.
But if you go to a day in FED court, you'll see people
of color on both sides of those fictions.
You'll be to see people of color who are landlords,
and you'll see people of color who are tenants.
This is a sledgehammer, not a scalpel.
I would absolutely 100% support this council
creating funds available to those people who are affected
by this to help them pay their rent.
I would 100% support this council donating months to funds
to Project home and to Greater Portland Family Promise
who are directly set up.
In fact, I was on the board
of Greater Port Family Pro Promise,
and our main purpose was helping new Mainers
find housing and pay for housing.
Um, and it was just, I mean, almost every one
of our clients was a new Mainer.
Um, we were, we were not just a general housing
group for all unhoused.
And so 100% would support that.
That is a more targeted approach to help those people
who are actually hurt by this.
And to make sure that this isn't harming those other people
who, you know, need this income potentially.
I understand that I supported Laboratorium before,
and in that one, we were able to target those people
who were directly responsible for the problem.
Because what we heard was
that in Red Bank they were charging 60% more for rent
or, you know, we saw 85%
rent increases and things like that.
And so we made sure that the, the, um, ordinance was set up
so that it did not target landlords
who had less than a certain number of units, which almost,
you know, we couldn't say this at the time
because it definitely would've been, um, you know, a cause
for, for a legal action against us.
But it pretty much meant
that the moratorium only affected Red Bank and,
and larger landlords who were doing that,
who were taking this new company
that came in and took over Red Bank.
Um, but, you know, I think that
this is very difficult for me.
I I hope you all understand this is very difficult for me.
It's like two principles of mine are colliding.
Um, the, the principle that does want me to stand up
for the marginalized to help those people who are very, uh,
who, who are on the outskirts of community and,
and who are, are now being subjected
to this horrible treatment
by our federal government absolutely feel that need.
And the principle that I have,
that we can't just throw out the rule book to do it
because that's what the other side does.
They just keep throwing out the rule book.
We can't just throw out the constitution.
There are people who would call this
an unconstitutional taking.
It's, there is a very good argument, I think
for state preemption, which is, I,
which is why I thought sending the message to the governor
to, um, Institute of Moratorium was much more appropriate
because that's a state action on a state law.
I mean, the framework I outlined it, that framework
for eviction process for, for the forcible entry
and detainer process is really detailed.
And if we, as a municipality, sure we have a lot of, um,
home rule authority, but it's pretty clear in the home rule
authority that there can be explicit preemption
and then there could be implicit preemption.
Well, we know it's not explicitly preempted.
'cause the, they, they didn't put that in the law.
It doesn't explicitly say this preempt statute,
but the definition of implicit, um, preemption is that
a municipality's regulation
or ordinance might frustrate the purpose of a state law.
Well, the purpose of the state law of forcible entry
and detainer is to allow landlords to evict their tenants.
And so I really think our action in this case
would frustrate the purpose of that state law.
So I've, I've really, you know, I
I really believe in process
and I understand the way this came forward.
I actually appreciate that the mayor heard public comment.
I asked questions of corporation council.
So I was part of that process that brought this forward.
I'm glad we're having this conversation.
Um, and I was on the fence for a long time on this
because of those two, two principles
that were fighting each other.
But where I land is that, you know, we're not just
protecting one set of, um, tenants
by enacting this law.
We're protecting all tenants.
And what if, you know, you're, you're a,
a white couple who's thinking, we gotta move out
of this apartment, but we can't save up, uh, a,
um, a security deposit.
Oh, south Portland just did an eviction moratorium.
I guess we don't have to pay rent for three months.
Let's save up the rent and go, now we can move elsewhere.
And it's really hard for a tenant to get paid rent,
they have to take someone to small claims court
and a landlord and a judgment against.
Um, it's, it's just a difficult thing to happen
because anyway, even if you get a judgment
of small claims regardless, um, I also,
I I don't, I don't see this passing,
but if it does pass, we probably have to update the, uh,
definition of no cause
because in the definition of no, cause it states, um,
the, uh, the causes
for filing a forceful entry container action listed in
either 14 NMRS section 6 0 0 2 1.
And one of those causes is the tenant is seven days
or more in rear, in arrears in payment of rent.
So in, in the definition of no,
cause it includes not payment of rent.
So I think we have to take that out of there.
But if I may, well, I,
I don't know if it's relevant at this point because I don't
Yeah. Necessarily think it's
gonna pass. So anyway,
Um, I'd like to have a chance for Mr.
Councilor Matthews to speak.
Yeah, I am. Just real quick, uh, I, I echo everything
that, uh, councilor Scott said.
Uh, I'm listening to, uh, a lawyer here,
a fellow counselor who has been in this process forever
and, uh, is, uh, is going against it.
I've heard both sides say tonight that, uh,
it really does do more harm than good.
But, and then, uh, the last thing I wanna say is,
respectfully, respectfully,
this process should have been done differently
and come up with other ideas than this one.
This put us in a position that none of us wanted to be in.
And I'm respectfully saying that I, I disagree with
how this all went, but, uh, uh, I just, uh, that's it.
That's all I have to say.
Thank you very much. Counselor Matthews.
Thank you, counselor Matthews. Thank you.
Unless you two wanna quibble about something at this moment,
which does not feel necessary, I think we're going to vote.
So, all in favor of passing the first read
of the ordinance, the first reading,
that's Counselors Walker
and Tipton, all against passing the first read
as the remaining four counselors
who are voting this evening.
We already have it on record that Councilor West is recused.
Thank you, community. Thank you.
And I guess you
may hear from our council in a different way,
some ideas for supporting our
neighbors who've been harmed.
And I think we're done
and ready to move on to the next item.
Can we ask council? Yes.
I think Councilor West will come back to the fold.
Okay.
You guys wanna stand up and some wiggle standing up
break or so, but thank you very much.
I think we're on a little bit of an informal two minute.
Okay. Counsel
will be in order.
We are returning on February 17th at 9 27.
Thank you very much.
Okay, Madam City Clerk, if you would please read order 1 51,
Order 1 51 25 26, authorizing the city manager
to enter into an administrative consent agreement
with the Portland International Jet Board
and Roman Catholic Bishop of Portland related
to the tree cutting violations passage
requires majority vote.
Thank you very much, Mr. City Manager.
Okay, so tonight, counsel's being asked as the clerk noted
to authorize me to sign the proposed, um,
administrative consent agreement with the parties, um, uh,
as included in your packet.
So hopefully you've all had a chance to review.
I know it's a lot of, uh, documents and exhibits
and information, but the, the primary document is
that consent decree itself.
Um, so we think we're recommending, obviously this was, uh,
agreement came about as also as a result of, um,
council guidance given in executive sessions.
But we believe it resolves significant land use
and ordinance enforcement issues.
Uh, it secures meaningful financial
penalties and mitigation.
It establishes long-term environmental
and neighborhood protections.
It avoids protracted litigation with uncertain outcomes.
And it also preserves our regulatory
regulatory authority going forward.
So if it got challenged in court
and the court was found to, you know, have said, you know,
that regulatory scheme is, is, um, is, is illegal, then, um,
uh, that would've not been good news for the city.
So, just a little bit of background.
In January, 2025,
the jet port conducted tree removal at two locations
on Broadway and Dawson Street.
These properties were owned by the Roman Catholic
Bishop of Portland.
Uh, the clear cutting, um, the clearing conducted
as a single effort across both of the sites.
Uh, the ordinance issues we identified included removal
of significant trees without tree protection approval,
ground disturbance exceeding 15,000 square feet without site
plan approval, uh, disturbance within mapped wetland areas
and violation of erosion and sediment control requirements.
Our code officer then issued three notices of violations,
um, four, uh, uh, for because of what happened, the JETPORT
and the RCB filed administrative appeals
to these notices of violations.
So that wound up with our Board of Appeals.
And during that process, um, at the recommendation
of our corporation counsel, the board of Appeals agreed
to stay their decision to, uh,
see if there could be a negotiated resolution, uh, uh,
that could be reached between the parties.
And again, council met an executive session, uh,
on several occasions to discuss terms
that would be acceptable as part of the consent agreement.
Um, some of the litigation risk
and preemption concerns that, uh, were cited
by corporation counsel as part
of this was the dispute over potential
federal aviation preemption.
So, as we've talked about in the last issue,
there's an argument that federal law
and FAA, uh, could preempt the city
and being able to have any control over, uh, tree cutting
or things that happened.
It is a complex and unsettled legal issue.
There would be the potential if pursued, um, outside
of the Board of appeals in, in the courts
for substantial legal costs, bringing in experts
for testimony at a cost to the city as well.
And there could be adverse precedent set.
So this settlement does avoid that uncertainty.
Uh, the financial terms of the agreement, $125,000 in total.
So that's a $50,000 civil penalty, effectively equates
to a thousand dollars, um, for 50 trees removed, uh,
50,000 donation
to the city's tree mitigation fund on top of that.
And then reimbursement for all of our legal expenses,
which were, uh,
around $25,000 payment would be due upon 14 days of, uh,
executing the agreement.
It also requires buffer restoration.
A minimum of 75 trees be planted along the
Dawson Street Buffer area.
These need to be a specific type.
The gray birch, balsam fur, Northern white cedar.
They need to be 36 inch box size to ensure maturity
and also need to withstand a three year inspection.
And if they haven't survived
or are in bad condition, they, uh, need to be replaced.
Uh, this also has several environmental compliance measures.
So there's no additional stump removal permitted, uh,
site site stabilization must occur per an approved erosion
and settlement control plan.
Wetlands must be flagged in the field
and the work must be done in accordance, um,
to a restoration plan that's reviewed by the city
Main Department of Environmental Protection
and the Army Corps of Engineers.
There will be a mandatory pre-construction
meeting before further work.
A tree removal completion plan is required,
and this agreement will be recorded at
the registry of Deeds.
And that's helpful because that means, uh,
this agreement runs with the land
and binds anyone who may purchase the land in the future.
Uh, so the legal effects of this agreement.
So as soon as, um, uh, this is signed,
the administrative appeals to the Board
of Appeal will be withdrawn by the, uh, Jeff Board and RCB.
The city will release claims only
after full compliance with the terms of the agreement.
So it's kind of a wait and see.
As long as everything is adhered to,
then we'll release our claims.
If there are continued violations,
we're not waiving our rights to enforce those violations.
Um, and there is no return to the planning board
that is triggered, um, in order to, um, uh,
as a result of these sanctions.
So again, number of public interest considerations,
which I won't repeat here, but, uh, are outlined in the memo
and, uh, supporting documentation.
Um, I want to acknow,
I I do think this acknowledges the concerns
of adjacent residents with, um,
tangible action and do want to thank them.
It's been a long process, again, since January of 2025.
And, um, even though the process is a, is a lengthy one, um,
I, uh, I know it's weighed heavy on them.
So thank them for, for their patience.
And my thanks to Brandon
and, um, Milan, Nevada for, uh, their diligent work.
And Nick, Richard, our, uh,
code enforcement officer as well.
Uh, so ultimately we're seeking, uh,
authorized solution from the city council to, um, uh,
to execute this agreement.
I'd invite Milan or Brandon if they want to add anything.
If I got anything wrong or skipped over anything
that they wanted to cover, we're happy
to answer questions otherwise.
Um, just a couple of, uh, minor, uh, additions.
Um, attorney Smith is here on behalf of Jetport.
We've, uh, this has also been signed off on by, um,
the, the diocese.
Um, I don't think Paul's here tonight,
but I think if there are any questions
for either the diocese or, or the jetport, Paul.
Thanks, uh, uh, Courtney can answer those.
Um, and also, so the pre-construction meeting, just
for the benefit of the public has already occurred.
That occurred last week.
Uh, so as an update that pre-construction
and the tree removal plan is,
is contemplated in this agreement, but was separate
and apart, sort of on a different path and trajectory.
Um, so that pre-construction meeting has,
has already occurred, uh, with staff, um,
as just a sort of update.
And, uh, part of the reason, um,
that the planning board is not required in this situation
is, um, in, in consulting with the DEPV, this work,
the additional work is happening under frozen conditions.
So there isn't an any intended wetland impacts, which is
what would've triggered that site.
So that's why, uh, they wanted to get it done, uh,
sooner during this period.
And, uh, it won't, won't trigger anything there.
Uh, and then the rest of the agreement is part of the notice
of violations, which is beyond the purview
of, of the planning board.
So those are the, the brief updates.
And, uh, again, I wanna thank Milan, he's, uh,
Ann Gordy and everybody else.
It's, it's been a long process,
but, um, I think we got there.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
And I also wanna add thanks
and I'm sure all of our council members do to staff
and, um, to you Brandon,
because staff had to really fly into action quickly on this,
and they've stuck with it and kept the neighbors updated
and, um, it's been very important work.
Um, and as Scott mentioned,
our council has participated in executive sessions along the
way to, um, be part of the agreement process.
But do counselors now have any questions you need to ask?
All right, well, if that is the case, let's open this up
for public comment, please.
Thank You everyone. I have a very
quick question about the trees.
Um, since all the trees,
Can you please state your name?
Zenia and I live on Zenia
Pantos and I live on Hall Street.
Um, so since all the trees have
to have a 36 inch box, that means
that they're all gonna be roughly the same age, right?
The furs are gonna be younger
and the birches are gonna be older just based on
what trees do more or less.
So if that is the case, are,
is there a management plan to ensure that these
plots are able to sustainably transition
into a mixed age stand?
And if so, is that something that can be added
or addressed? That's all. Thank you.
Thank you very much. More public comment on this topic.
Uh, Carolyn Nihon, Dawson Street.
Um, a couple more just questions,
but first of all, Milan, thank you.
You've been so diligent in all of your work.
Much appreciated. Um, it's been a tough go
for many members of Dawson Street.
It's been quite emotional, uh, even just today, uh,
while everything that was taken down was approved,
I think all of us hearing those saws come through
and watching the trees get felled again, uh,
brought back a lot of last year
and how awful that felt.
And to watch them fall again, it's been a,
I think it's been a tough day all around.
Um, I think I, I would like to,
I would like to understand two things.
Um, you said it was a meaningful financial penalty.
How do you decide what meaningful is?
$125,000 can be an extraordinary amount to some corporations
and a tiny,
ticking a little line item on a budget to another company.
Uh, so I wanna, I would like to understand what that means
because if this, say the, um, ownership changes, who knows
who owns that land next, they decide to, uh,
make another violation.
And, um, $125,000 is absolutely nothing.
How do you stop this from happening again?
What is actually meaningful here?
Um, uh, you said it was maximum penalties,
so it sounds like there were some, uh, uh, measures
that were decided previously.
A thousand dollars a tree. Who decides that?
Is that the right amount?
Um, and then it sounds like the jet court is the one
to pay the $125,000.
Um, I'm not, I, I believe that's right.
Uh, and I would like to understand, uh, what, if any,
or are there no consequences for the Roman Catholic bishop
of the diocese and how, um, that came to pass if
everyone went into the room to make things right.
Uh, how does everybody put
skin in the game to make it right?
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Additional public comment. Thank you.
Hi, Cassie Moon Dawson Street.
I wanna begin with also expressing my thanks to Milan
and city council for the work you've done.
I need to recognize the time and the e energy
and dedication that went into reaching and agreement.
And thank you all for your patience, your work,
your willingness to hear me and my community,
and to everyone up there that took the time to come out
and witness the destruction
and listen to me while I shared my emotional
reactions last year.
Thank you. When so much happens out
of the public eye, silence can feel like indifference.
It can make us feel powerless and alone.
And I understand that a lot of work happened
behind the scenes and I appreciate the efforts.
I just want you to understand how it felt
in my sincere hope that you'll all vote tonight
to settle this so we can move on.
'cause yesterday at 7:26 AM the equipment arrived at the
cemetery entrance, another emotional week for me
and my community.
I'm trying to stay focused on the
outcome and the path forward.
I do need to point out
that there was no issue bringing in big equipment down
the road that the diocese lawyer told you was nothing more
than an old bicycle path
that cannot withstand this equipment.
If they had done it the right way,
the 36 Dawson Street would not have been clear cut.
I'll continue to ask you to keep
that property a residentially zoned
and keep my neighborhood from
safe from further commercial purposes.
Today was a difficult day watching more destruction,
but I'm trying hard
to be focused on the completion and the replanting.
It's strange that the wildlife seemed
to know what's happening in advance in their world.
The turkeys are acting differently
and barely eaten eating the deer and the coyotes are absent.
The squirrels in the songbirds are quieter
till the cutting stops.
Sometimes it feels like mother nature listens when we don't.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Thank you
Once again, Julia Edwards, Dawson Street.
Um, I'm gonna say this at the outset
'cause I might forget, I'm nearly shaking
with like sadness and anger.
So, um, I apologize for my voice,
but um, I also urge you to just vote for this
and get on with it, um, so we can move along.
Um, and also,
um, questions.
How is it that I see the name Roman Catholic, Bishop
of Portland up on that
and there is zero accountability to the public
publicly for what they allowed to happen
and their complicity in this activity.
Ridiculous. Um, two,
a meaningful amount of money.
Um, I would like to understand if there was any opportunity
for, uh, additional reparations
or penalties to be added beyond
what just the trees are worth.
There's a lot of suffering
and pain that has happened on my street and beyond.
Um, and as my neighbor Cassie said, uh,
in a video recording of all of the destruction today, um,
well they're, at least they're gonna replant,
but I probably won't be allowed to see it.
So, great. Thank you for that.
Um, planning peels board,
I need to understand how
We're supposed to just accept
that now a price has been put on what it costs
to violate in this way.
Um, what's the metric?
And is this just what companies can factor in
as a cost now for doing business?
Um, I would like to specifically hear if possible, um,
and this is a request that comes from a lot of people
that aren't here as well.
Well, how each of you would feel
if this happened in your backyard,
because it didn't happen in your backyard.
And so I'd really like to know, um, where you're at with
that throughout
the process of the last year.
Um, we've been lied to. You've been lied to.
The Planning Appeals board was lied to.
Um, they pay fancy lawyers to do that for them,
and you know, that's great for them that they can afford it.
And my estimation, the $125,000 is an example of
that drop in the bucket or just a tick of a line item.
But it's just,
it's wildly unfair
and it smells, um,
literally like the smell WAFs across the, the land now, um,
that the trees used to help protect.
So, um, yeah, I just would like to know going forward, um,
is this what we can expect?
Thank you.
Okay. Do we have any other persons
who wanna make public comment about this?
I don't see any so public comment on this topic is closed.
Um, I think that we, we do need to have a motion
for council to pass this question.
Question. Oh. Oh, I'm sorry. I keep
You guys, I'm sorry.
I really do want your questions answered.
So, first question perhaps for Milan about the, um,
plantings, do they need to have a management plan
to ensure the plots can withstand their
tradition to transition?
Yeah. Um, Milana invited the planning director.
So we had consulted, uh, I believe actually the jetport
and the diocese had worked together to come up
with an initial planting plan that they thought was,
um, workable.
And I know DEP and Army Corps were part of that
because some of it has to do
with whether the species will survive in the wetlands.
So there was some initial pre-vetting,
and then our own city arborists consulted, uh,
or reviewed that we discussed internally.
And so the species were selected
because they met that sort of balance of something
that's not gonna grow again and need to be cut.
So it was just sort of a, a throwaway thing.
Uh, so these species should stay
within, uh, the height limits.
They should be compatible with the wetlands,
um, and they should be planted.
We have some specifics around the, uh, spacing
between the trees so that they can survive
and, uh, thrive in those conditions.
There is a requirement for a check-in
and inspection at the end of the process
to make sure that the trees are there.
And we had a provision, uh, just like our landscape plans
for site plan and development in the city, generally, uh,
three years after planting that there's a check-in.
And if the plants are thriving, then we establish,
we consider them established.
And from there on, it's, it's sort
of nature running Its course that will be succession.
Some of these trees may eventually phase out,
and new species will, will come back in.
I mean, it will be a canopy that grows,
but we're, uh, starting it or seeding it.
With the 75 trees, the 36 inch box size is, um,
is, is the measurement that you just get from a nursery?
It, it is not what you typically buy, what you
and I would typically buy for our backyards.
It's, um, a little bit larger than that.
So the trees are more established, they're hardier, uh,
and able to survive a little bit more readily.
Great. So next question.
I'm gonna probably lump most
of the remaining questions into one.
It was about the penalties.
So Brandon, probably best for you, determining the amount,
what's meaningful, where does the one K amount, um, come in?
Um, how is that decided?
Was the op was there an opportunity
for additional penalties, uh, et cetera?
Um, so At, at its basic form
of consent agreement is,
is in essence a settlement agreement.
So there is some negotiation that takes place.
The $50,000 for the tree, um, for the trees is, um,
there's some uncertainty, um,
on the number of trees taken down.
Um, but the general I thought was it was somewhere around 50
in the tree protection ordinance.
There's a thousand dollars per tree, uh, replacement.
That's how that $50,000 came up.
Um, the donation to the tree, um, replacement fund,
that was a little bit of, uh, I'll be honest,
creativity in terms of, um, it was sort of outside the,
the fine and penalty world.
Um, but it was a way to get additional funds
to address those additional concerns of tree removal.
Um, and then, um, we, we negotiated the coverage of
most of, um, the legal costs in born by the city.
So that's the, um, rationale, um, behind it.
Additionally, um, as part of that negotiation,
the 36 inch box, uh,
for trees is a more expensive tree than
what's required under the ordinance.
So, uh, guidance from the council
and wanting to make sure that buffer was replanted
and with more mature trees.
So, uh, they, they survive and create that buffer sooner.
Uh, that was also part of the negotiation.
Um, in terms,
Did That hit, I think that hit those, um, in terms of,
uh, the Royal Catholic Bishop
and the Jetport, um, the notice of violations were issued
to both, um, these are land use violations.
So the royal, ultimately, the,
the diocese is the one responsible.
Uh, this, um, agreement gets recorded, runs with the land,
will be, um, on the, if this ever sells on new owners,
how the jet port
and the diocese negotiated between themselves, uh, is
outside, was outside my scope.
Uh, what we cared about was getting the, the buffering done
and getting, getting the penalties paid.
So, um, I don't know what their, their agreement is.
Uh, it wasn't part of, of, part of my discussions with them,
um, that those that I hit everything.
Scott,
You can ask for more stuff.
F for you, I think it might be helpful to understand,
is there an ability for the city to treat?
I think two questions that might be helpful that are related
to treat, if it's a large entity
or corporation, different than we would,
if this was a small scale outfit,
can we charge different fees to, to people based on their,
their perceived, um, profits or bank account?
And then also if we would've said, no, you're gonna spend,
we're we're gonna make a statement,
you're gonna pay a million dollars.
What's the likelihood a judge would've upheld any of that?
Yeah. So it, the short answer is, is no,
it's gotta be reasonably related to the,
the violation at hand.
So if we had, if we had made it completely a crazy number,
and we had gone and tried to enforce that
and gone to, to a judge,
it likely either would've been significantly cut out
or frankly, probably would've been in some sort
of negotiation mediation anyway,
which would've added extra costs, um, to the say.
So. It's, it's really gotta be related directly to, um, the,
the violations at hand.
And then there was a question for the council about
how each of you would feel if it happened in your backyard.
I'll take that one. It didn't happen in my backyard,
but it sure as heck happened in my neighborhood.
And it happened on a street
that my husband walks every single day.
And often I join him.
It happened to a friend of more than 20 years.
How did I feel? Stunned, shocked, angry.
That's my answer.
Well, I'll speak, I'm still upset about the corridor.
Okay. That big swath for electricity to go
to Massachusetts, which is So that's enough for me.
Yes. I'm upset about this.
Oh, Are we, are we going around? Is that what we're
No, I only volunteered because it's my neighborhood.
It's adjacent to my neighborhood.
It is a street that I walk and run pretty regularly.
And I came down and, and walked the property
and it was, it was a shock.
Yep. It was a shock. It is devastating. And I'm,
It even works close.
Forced. Yeah. Yeah. It doesn't have to be Right.
I've lost track of where we are. We've answered questions.
We need to vote. Do we have a motion for passage? Thank you.
I'm Councilor Pride. Thank you.
Councilor West. Councilor Pride.
Yeah. I, I'll also answer your question.
I just like waiting to do it when it's, I our turn to talk,
which it's just me.
You guys can all do what you want.
Um, but I, speaking especially as someone who,
maybe the lone member of this council who voted
for the tree protection ordinance, when it came up in 2019,
I actually was on vacation when it came up.
And I took a break from my time in Vegas to get on a Zoom so
that I could be virtually in this room
to vote for that ordinance.
It was so important for, to me,
and it's one of the reasons why I absolutely,
when Cassie called and asked if I'd come
and tour the area, I, you know,
I took her as soon as I could.
I, you know, I have what's in my backyard.
I I would be devastated.
And I feel for you.
Um, you know, I, I support this. I'm gonna move forward.
I think it helps us, it helps in, in a small way
all of us move forward.
Um, I do think based on some of the early negotiations,
which can't really talk about publicly, um,
that there was some give here, you know, there was some give
to get us to this and not on our part.
Um, we asked for some things that weren't in the initial,
and, and there was some gifts.
So that made me feel really a lot better, um,
about asking it for it to be brought, uh, in front
of the council and to approve it publicly.
Um, I appreciate that.
You know, the, in America, in the American legal system,
there's something called the American Rule about legal fees.
And in most cases, outside of settlement,
each party's responsible for their own legal fees.
And it's a pretty significant thing, actually.
Um, I don't have a lot of settlement agreements that I get
to the end of where the other party agrees
to pay even a portion of the legal fees,
um, for the other party.
And so that was actually something I found a
significant give as well.
Um, so you know, that along with the fact
that the buffer, the buffer's so important
and to get that, um, planted, uh, meant a lot
to me, having seen the effect of the removal.
Um, and so for those reasons and,
and more that I can't talk about necessarily,
but also more that I just don't wanna take the time, um, I,
I will be supporting this.
Thank you.
Uh, as a seconder,
I'll just say I very much appreciate the work done
by our planning director
and our corporate counsel, particularly the detail
of the settlement agreement, uh, which I think is
as much specificity as one could encounter,
and will help us enforce the terms of this agreement
to make sure that the work is done appropriately.
Thank you. Any other counselor?
Wish to speak? All right.
Well, Who is in favor of authorizing the city manager
to enter into this agreement?
It's unanimous vote of all members of council.
Thank you very much. Thank you guys. Thank
You.
Okay. Count, uh, excuse me, city clerk,
could you please read the next order,
Order number 1 52 25 26, acceptance of grants
and donation passage prize majority vote.
We have one donation this evening
for our general assistant team in the amount of $200.
Thank you very much. Any questions?
Oh my God, I just lost my head. Did we do public comment?
Do we have anyone who wants
to make any comment about our don our donation?
No. Seeing none, no comments.
Comment is closed on that. What is the wish of our council?
Move the passage. Counselor Matthews seconded.
Counselor Walker. All in favor? That's unanimous.
Thank you very much for that donation.
Okay. Uh,
Okay.
Well, we, I, well,
I, I just sort of need to publicly put this out there.
We have a very important discussion coming up.
It's a workshop discussion. It's long planned.
It's also 10 o'clock.
Do we have any other,
I don't think we have a good option other than to say,
buckle your seatbelts,
slap yourself on the cheeks and let's go.
Go. Yes. Counselor West one.
Uh, I'd like to make one suggestion
'cause I think we're, we're all tired.
Uh, or at least speaking for myself, this is what I'm tired.
I would suggest that we focus just on the Mahoney building
and we defer any discussion whatsoever of the public safety,
police and fire until another workshop,
which we should set at our next meeting.
Alright. I, Otherwise,
our conversation is just gonna get too
Confused. I, I
don't hear that as a motion.
I hear that as a strong suggestion.
Suggestion, right? Because it's a workshop,
so we're just suggesting.
Alright, well, let's get the workshop underway.
It sounds like we need to be disciplined.
I can't, it sounds like we need to be disciplined.
It doesn't seem like it might be that difficult to follow
that suggestion, counselor West,
but it could be that we need to make some references
to the other in our discussion.
So, who's leading us off?
Just give a quick intro.
We're gonna hear them from the chair
of the M three C, Mike Halsey.
We're gonna hear from our design team.
And then I've got the, um, answers to the questions
that Counselor West had asked, uh, at the, at the last fart.
And then it'll be opportunity for, um, council to weigh in.
So, very quickly, uh, last month,
council at a workshop had
provided guidance, um, to the initial proposal presented
by the, uh, M three C and design team.
The $194 million project, um, to come back.
Six to seven counselors said that that's not gonna work.
So come back with some other options, a phased approach.
So maybe either city hall or library first
or police and fire first.
Uh, and then a number of options dealing with Mahoney.
So city hall and library there with the theater
and gym, just city hall there, no library,
but with the theater and gym, just city hall
and no theater and gym.
A bunch of different options. And so, uh,
that information was discussed at the, uh,
January 27th, M three C meeting.
They came up with some recommendations, um, uh, on that.
And so you're gonna hear again from Mike Halsey
to talk about what their specific request is,
and that will require some council guidance.
So I'll invite the chair, Mike Halsey up to, uh, give
that brief overview.
Thank you. Mike Halsey, uh, chair
of the mc M three C committee.
Uh, this was a lot more fun.
It was a single item workshop on six 30,
but, uh, uh,
good evening councilors and members of the public.
Um, as,
and a lot of what I'm gonna say is in
Scott's position paper.
So I'm just gonna kind of abbreviate this real quick.
But as you know, at your January 13th City Council, uh,
workshop, you directed the committee to review designs
for a more bare bones approach, uh,
to the city center at Mahoney.
And also review if there's any cost savings with,
uh, phasing the projects.
Uh, when the committee met on January 27th, um,
although the, um, and you may,
maybe you'll see him tonight from the design team,
we were not provided with cost estimates,
but the presentation from the, uh, design team made it clear
that there was no such thing as a bear bones approach.
Uh, and the renovating Mahoney, um, uh,
it there numerous codes
and requirements that triggered, uh,
requiring significant financial investment
to bring the building up to current standards.
Um, the reality is that we, the reuse of Mahoney,
we very expensive in a costly endeavor for the city
or for any other developer for that matter.
So the committee did vote, uh, based upon the information
that provided by the design team, which I,
again, you'll see that tonight.
Uh, not to recommend, we, we voted not to recommend phasing
and not to recommend a bare bones approach.
Simple as that. Uh, additionally, the committee, uh,
recommended that assuming the city council does not wish to,
uh, to re to pursue Mahoney as a city center,
or should a new location be explored,
that you repurpose the focus of our committee
to look at other ways to consolidate
and make needed upgrades, uh, to the city of services,
including prioritizing facilities, uh,
with the highest needs.
Uh, so long story short,
we have a really dedicated committee with, um, a lot
of very qualified people.
And if you decide to go in any other direction,
then you could consider repurposing, uh, the committee
to whatever needs you see fit. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Mike. Who's, is Craig coming up next?
Yes, Craig Piper, SMRT will give you the,
uh, detail you asked for at the last meeting.
Oh, lemme just switch to
VGA. Thank
you, Craig.
All right. Okay.
Craig Piper from SMRT.
Uh, this is a big topic and I hate to rush it,
but the evening, I will try to go as fast as I can,
but there's a lot of information
that we've done since last time that we presented to
the mc three that Mike referenced.
But for those who, uh, both on the council
that may have not seen that
and the public, I think it, it such a significant project.
It takes, uh, there's a lot of parts to it,
so I will go fast, but I'll try not to skip. Well, thank
You, Craig.
Do what you need to do. I am sorry it's late.
We're all's Sorry. It's late, but it's important material.
Thank you. So again, what, what we heard,
uh, Scott summarize that it, it,
the combined project was too much.
How can we look at different ways to focus and allocate
and understand the city services center, um, with,
uh, with Mahoney, the phasing,
we talked a lot about already over the, over the last couple
of, uh, presentations, um, looking at different ways
to tackle the project.
We had four, four options originally.
We priced one in the concept design.
We've been focusing on these two of
how does the project phase in time, if you build,
started building one part of the project,
is there a duration to to phase out the project?
Um, the two scenarios of the b
and two, um, have impacts on
I turn into color.
That's amazing. Shoot,
We're so close.
Happy Valentine's Day.
All
Might just have to go with it. This
thing's going, so we got something else on order.
It'll, okay. So let's just jump to cost.
So the things that you asked us about,
there was some simple things in the concept design
that we, we evaluated.
Um, we also looked at ways that we can
simplify the project that still meets the programming needs.
We also looked at three options on the site development,
which is all combined in the evaluation.
So just to touch base on
what is a minimal renovation at Mahoney
and parts of the project, um,
because it's, uh,
any building, any development of a project
follows many sets of building codes.
One is the A DA, which is accessibility for folks
with disabilities.
Um, the existing building code,
we have the international building code,
and they have the energy code.
All those components fall in that center section about
what is allowed to be built in any renovation, new addition.
The other component is life safety.
When we're in a building, how do we get out
of the building safely?
So are there enough stairs, exits, um, ways
to occupy the building.
So those are the major code components of a project.
So one element, if we know that Mahoney was closed,
it's, it's a vacant building.
It's partially occupied with the, with the U using the gym
or some, uh, school pro or youth programs.
Um, but the question would be
if we had to turn the building back into a school since
it's been vacant, that is a trigger for,
um, a change of use.
So even us going back to a school would trigger
bringing all the a DA requirements
for accessibility in the building.
Currently, there's no elevator.
The theater and gym would all require
accessibility components.
And then life safety is another component.
And that also limits gathering spaces of 50 people,
uh, or no more than 50 people on the third floor
of the building because of its construction type.
It's a construction type called three B, which is a,
is is a term.
Buildings are ranked from one building, type one
to building type five.
One would be concrete, five would be wood.
We're in the middle. And based on an occupancy for a school,
we're not allowed to have more than 30, more than 50 people
on the third floor in an assembly occupancy.
So that's just all the improvements that we would need
to do to go back to a school.
Converting the building into an education, um,
from a school to a business,
a business is actually a higher hazard than an education.
I know that seems a little odd,
but the idea is that a business occupancy,
people aren't necessarily familiar with the building, how
to enter the building, exit the building.
Whereas in education, there's teachers, there's training,
there's scenarios of exiting the building.
So all the same requirements, a DA we'd have to meet for
both the theater and gym as well as access to the building.
We have to also limit the number
of occupants on the third floor for,
so for example, a city council chamber
couldn't be located on the third floor
or the mezzanine of the theater.
Um, the change of use required for structural renovations,
I think I mentioned the improvements that we have to do
to the building structure when it's a change of use.
When it's a change of use
and you're adapting for city services.
The code allows for if you can prove that you're within 5%
of the design of today's code to when it was built.
But with the building over a hundred years ago,
it doesn't necessarily meet that, which means
that we do have to follow all those structural improvements.
Um, ventilation is also a huge part of the building
to meet our requirement.
And then because it's a historic building, there are,
um, tools that, um, that we're allowed for
to minimize the improvements on energy
and a historic building.
However, those improvements are typically
only allowed where you can't prove you can
do it another way.
So for example, um, Paul Revere's birthplace, you,
you wouldn't change that building
because it's historic inside and out.
Mahoney is the historic designation is more on the
exterior than the interior.
And we can improve the energy requirements on the inside
of the building while keeping the historic fabric.
And then the other component is we, um, one climate feature,
we and the city ordinances meeting the energy code,
but it's also exceeding the energy code by a stretch code.
So those are elements that are layered onto,
um, the project.
So you asked us to look at a number
of scenarios and maybe you, you go wiggle that word again.
So the lower right,
the lower right hand option
Here. Hey. Yep.
Perfect.
Is that good boost? Perfect.
So the lower right hand corner is the
idealized concept plan that we presented to the group.
That is the city services, the library,
renovating the theater and the auditorium.
The upper left is saying we are just going
to put city services in
and we are not going to plan for the library.
And a lot of the building is vacant.
We're just gonna focus on the first, the lower two floors.
For, um, city services, the way
that this chart is, the, uh, theater
and gym is not used on the zero options.
So A, B,
and C, the bottom, the one option A one, B one
and C one allows cost
or the ability to use the theater and gym.
And then the cost associated with that.
The B option is the, um, message
of if the library, if the council decides that the library,
uh, should not be part of this project,
but we would like to see it come in the future.
So it's, it's, it's sort
of postponing the plan of the library.
So we're planning the city services on the upper two floors.
The lower level would basically be vacant
that we wouldn't build the library edition,
but we would plan for the library
to be incorporated at a future time.
And then, um, and again, those are the scenarios.
The white is vacant space.
So it's a little, so when we are looking at cost estimates,
you gotta think through, we're saying
that third floor on the, the A zero option, the top,
um, option, the third floor, there's no use of
that space 'cause we're not doing major improvements.
There's no occupancy.
We're limiting the cost to, to use those spaces,
but we're also planning for the future.
So for example, we can't put an elevator that only goes
to those two floors.
We would want to plan the elevator to go to the third floor,
but you can't use it.
Same with any work that we do in the theater.
We have to allow to meet the current code of not being,
of, of providing accessibility and access.
But the, the pendulum of the amount of work,
the left side, the, the A options are minimal work.
And the middle as we move to the right is all the work
that we've, you've asked for
and the improvements, um, fully.
So That helps.
So one thing on the site, so those A options,
what we're saying is there's minimal site work
because we're just renovating the building, we're not going
to, uh, change any of the significant parking circulation,
the ball field stay.
Um, that also means that the incorporation
of a geothermal system would be not part of the project.
It would be a different solution for the heating
and cooling of the building
because it's, we're using only a smaller
portion of the project.
The B options, as I mentioned, the idea is that the library
in the propo where we were in our concept plan still can
come, we're improving the site just enough
to meet the city services components,
but we are also investing in the geothermal system
for future buildup.
So it's a higher upfront cost than the B options.
'cause we're, we're planning the building
to be fully fit up at some point.
And lastly, the C option is the presentation, the site plan
that we presented last time.
However, it doesn't include any work
for the police station side.
So no connection to Highland, um,
and all the options that we're, we're sharing.
So the cost of those options, and I know you can't see it,
and I'll, uh, it, it is in the packet.
Um, the range of options for both construction costs
as well as the soft costs.
We talked about that last time.
The hard cost and the soft cost.
Um, the options range from about $57 million
to $104 million.
And, and if we dropped it on those,
uh, scenarios, again, it's a big, it's a big swing between
the amount of work, but we also, half
or more than half of the building is vacant.
And some of the options were, as we go
to the right hand side, most of the building is reused.
Um, the, the question, um,
and, uh, councilor West I mentioned about just sticking
to the Mahoney.
I, I guess the only thing I wanted to share is this,
that's in the packet is kind of coming back to where we were
with all these options for Mahoney, but adding police
and fire, just so we understand the full scope.
And then the question of the scope of the project.
How did the, the options
that we share affect the guiding principles
that we've been following of community centered design,
integrated city services, achieving one climate goals,
providing a future focused, um, plan with the respect
to history, provide a safe and accessible
and healthy facility as well
as the smart investment of public funds.
So as we go through these, um, we've
provided a key, um,
and we shared this with the mc three group of from a yes,
maybe a no, do we meet those guiding principles?
So the option A zero, which was just move city services.
Um, we really, we don't have any definite yeses for,
um, the the guiding principles.
Um, but we have three nos and three maybes.
If we add that, uh, theater
and, uh, auditorium, I'm sorry, auditorium
and gymnasium spaces.
Um, we have four maybes and two nos
because we're introducing more community
services into the building.
And then planning for a library to be sort of,
uh, postponed.
The project cost is about 78, 78,
8 million to 85 million.
We've put a range on the a and b options
because we didn't have a full set of drawings
for the estimator.
This is, um,
they did a great job in getting the numbers broken out.
Um, but we wanted to provide you with the range
because it's not as detailed as the full report
that we had done previously.
Um, so the b options start to meet a lot
of the guiding principles.
Um, however, um, argument
that we still don't have this integrated city functions
because the library isn't component,
uh, isn't part of the project.
And again, the auditorium and Jim the same.
And then the concept design
that we shared last time, if we just didn't do the, the
auditorium and Jim didn't is just moth wall.
We stay out of it.
It's still a significant cost to add a new library
and city services in that building.
And then just the full project,
just Mahoney is about $105 million.
All those options, uh, broken out
and I guess we had other breakouts,
but I don't think that's the purview for tonight.
Um, I think went way too fast.
Hopefully it makes sense. No, thank you.
Um, Scott, I put up the questions that you had
for the council to discuss.
Great. Thanks Greg.
Alan, did you want to, anything you wanted to co cover?
Okay, I'm gonna, yep. Just wanna make sure.
So unless you, I'm gonna do a quick fly through of the, um,
response to the questions that were asked publicly, uh,
that were intended to be responded to at this workshop.
Okay. So, um, I did provide these to counsel in advance.
We'll post them on the website as well.
So I'm not gonna clearly not gonna read every, um, line
'cause some of the responses are long.
So first question was, is it accurate?
South Portland has the highest bond rating
of any city in Maine.
So, uh, the answer is, uh, US
and 10 other communities hold the highest bond rating
awarded by s and p Global,
but we're only one of three communities
with the highest rating awarded by Moody's.
So we have the highest possible bond rating from both
agencies, not all communities, uh, here obviously have that
is our bond rating related
to the amount of debt that we have.
Um, the amount of debt is one data point that's used
by itself, does not generally impact the rating.
Determination includes a lot of factors such
as local economy, financial performance reserves
and liquidity and management.
How much additional debt can we issue
to maintain our bond rating?
So there's not a specific amount of debt
that triggers a bond rating.
Change a community
with very little debt can have a lower bond rating than a
community with a high level debt.
And you'll actually see that in some other communities in
Maine Over time since Mahoney became vacant,
would've been the cost to maintain the building
and what revenue have received from
activities taking place there.
So you'll see over the past three years,
the costs have ranged between 53,000 a year to 102,000, uh,
minimal revenue because we only have one, um, entity
that is currently leasing space.
Some others have utilized it on a daily basis,
but it's been for things like training,
not anything we've really charged for.
Uh, if we continue this arrangement,
what does the design team think about the impact on the
building of leaving it largely on you?
So there's a lot here,
but essentially our design folks had indicated
that there's a lot of, um, uh, beck, uh, uh, requirements
that, um, you can leave the building empty,
but you still need to keep it secured,
maintain the exterior, avoid health and safety hazards,
and comply with all building codes.
So there's recommendations about monitoring with security.
Cameras, sensors, smart alarms,
make sure we're doing inspections at certain intervals, um,
maintaining the exterior for a variety of reasons.
Uh, deterring crime, uh, you know,
making sure we don't accelerate weather damage
that happens, et cetera.
Um, ma managing utility, so, uh, winterizing the property
and also keeping the electricity on for security systems.
Dehumidifiers, uh, we've had some issues
with mold there as well.
Uh, and then weather hardening, um,
roof inspections, et cetera.
How much has the current central fire station
deteriorated over the past five years?
Do you have any reason to believe
that it will deteriorate faster in the coming five?
Uh, so talking to chief and,
and, um, design folks, it's difficult
to quantify deterioration.
Over the past five years.
Emergency repairs have increased
and we're budgeting for an increase in operational expenses
over the next five years.
Facility doesn't meet codes, as you all know.
There's a lack of adequate a lot of things,
which is why we're looking at the renovation.
Um, last time any substantive attention was given
to the building was the fall of 2010 to repair the concrete
and to eliminate water leaks into the building through its,
uh, age masonry walls.
That was $165,000 expense.
Um, that work was completed 16 years ago.
And you can see the rate at which those repairs have failed
by just looking at the building.
Uh, concrete castings not watertight, will only get worse
as they continue to be exposed to the elements.
Um, outstanding capital issues.
There's a number of them that need
to be addressed in the next five years, you know, all, um,
varying in, in price from a hundred thousand up to uh,
500,000 for facade repairs.
Fire separation that
Facade repair is, is a million
dollars, not hundred thousand.
Okay. I got a quote just
to do the concrete on it at 500.
Thank you. So if we repointed to brexton it did all the
exterior windows and so on and so forth.
Helpful. Alright, thanks.
So there's a lot that would need to, to be put into
that building if, uh, we're not intending to, um, renovate.
Uh, what was the, when was the dispatch center moved from
the South Portland station to Portland?
What was the reason it was moved?
So around 2005,
the state mandated there be no more than 24 public
safety answering points.
PSAPs in Maine. In 2007, we discussed with Portland
merging our dispatch centers
and sign an MOU to that effect that same year.
Uh, the dispatchers from South Portland didn't move
to Portland until 2010 when this occurred,
the center in Portland also absorbed Cape Elizabeth's 9 1 1
and dispatch services as well.
L uh,
how much has the current central
police station deteriorated?
Same question, uh, as was for central fire.
What do you see coming in the next five years?
Again, hard to quantify how much or how fast the PD has
or will deteriorate.
Um, uh, many repairs have been put off as they have
with other buildings, with the expectation a new building
will address the concerns.
Uh, there's water infiltration
and long-term deferred maintenance, um, that, uh, continue
to, um, uh, deteriorate the building components
with each intrusion or freeze and thaw action.
There's been mold growth, um, and that can't be seen
or excess for proper remediation
that can cause airborne respiratory issues, HVAC issues,
basements in the office, uh,
basement offices including evidence storage continue
to flood toilets in the female locker room, continue
to back up till the piping to the street is replaced.
Uh, staff will continue to have concerns about lack
of restroom facilities, parking lot issues, et cetera.
So as, as one of the, um, folks who reviewed this indicated,
the better question may be, at
what rate will morale continue to deteriorate, uh,
outstanding HVA, uh, projects like with the fire department,
there's a lot of things here that if we,
if we don't move into a new PD soon, would need
to be looked at ranging anywhere from 50 K to $450,000.
So the summary here of all these questions,
ultimately renovating Mahoney first
and delaying a new police in Central Fire Station
and the opinion, um, of the group that looked at this,
will be more costly for a variety of reasons
that makes sense to focus on police and central fire.
First is the cost of keeping Mai vacant over the next
several years, assuming a phased approach is less expensive
than will need to be invested in, uh, police
and central fire to keep them afloat while
awaiting new buildings.
List of buildings we have built in individual
outstanding bonds for each.
So you'll see here going all the way back
to the high school bond in 2014, that has a balance
of 3.9 million.
The last payment is an FY 34,
and then most recently the middle school,
which is mostly paid for by the state and PET improvement.
So a total of 89.1 million, uh, in outstanding bonds.
And again, a bulk of that, uh, for is for the middle school
and is and will be paid
and is being paid by the state
Can fire meet its response times with locations
that are at the Hill Street Tank Farm.
If the city obtained a site on some portion
of the non-operating PPLC facility, according
to police chief, no,
our fire department bases its response time on standards set
by the NFPA that dictates
that the first fire engine should arrive no later than five
minutes and 20 seconds from the time of a time of,
of an alarm notification 90% of the time.
There's a lot of factors that impact this arrival time,
including whether a firetruck was in the station at the time
of the alarm, whether the typically closest firetruck was
already committed to another emergency traffic issues,
whether, and of course, the station location.
Uh, our stations right now are generally well spaced using a
1.5 mile radius of measurement for our fire engines pumpers
and two point a half mile radius
measurement for our ladder trucks.
Our current station, uh, we, with this current setup,
we meet N-F-A-P-A 61.6% of the time,
at least we did last year.
So we're below the standard.
Moving central fire to the west is not an option
as we would significantly overlap the response area
of cash corner fire station.
And we'd leave a significant portion of some
of our densest neighborhoods on the east end outside of
that 1.5 mile radius measurement.
As you'll see in this attached map, the light gr the light,
the green is where we are now that light, uh,
transparent green on the rim, that kind of crescent moon,
uh, if it were moved to the PPLC area,
that would be the area outside of that zone.
And you'd see there's a lot of overlap with Corner
and even Western Fire.
By, by moving to that location,
how large a site would be needed
for a new fire station building.
If we started with a new site, so bottom line, at least two
and a, about 2.2 and a quarter to two
and a half acres, how large a site would be needed
for the new PD if we chose another site other than Mahoney?
Uh, so, um, the, uh, analysis there ranged from two
and a half to three acres at a minimum,
how large a site if we combined, uh,
Collier suggests a site, not less than five acres.
Have we explored other ways of constructing
or financing an entirely new police
or fire facility, such as leased purchase or design build.
As of now, the work of the M three C uh,
has really focused on the Mahoney building site only.
So that subcommittee's not directly discussed, um,
separate financing options for police or fire.
Those can be reviewed if the project is, uh, broken up.
Have we explored other ways of financing Mahoney?
So the report of the M three C funding subcommittee, uh,
as you know, list various types of funding sources, uh,
and, uh, the conclusions with, um, what their investigation
and preliminarily revealed about those funding sources.
The subcommittee will continue to work if the,
if they continue with their charge on a specific funding
recommendation to the committee
and ultimately to the council.
Um, uh, prior to any, uh, recommendation for a referendum,
we have information in the National Guard facility in
Western NAV will be available in the next few years.
What are the steps to pursue acquiring
that property for public use?
So, um, as of now, the timeline, uh,
funding has been requested of Congress
for a new facility in Saco for the FY 27 federal budget,
which begins in October.
If that goes through the budget process,
construction would likely be begin in fiscal 28.
Takes about a year for the funds to become available
if everything goes perfect.
Um, the earliest a move in could occur would
be calendar year 2030.
Uh, the federal lease of the SP station does
run through 2038.
So they technically have until then to move.
Um, city doesn't have a right of first refusal
to pur purchase the property.
The state's not technically required
to offer it to government entities.
Um, and they must sell it
for no less than the appraised value.
Typically, the state will issue bids for sale
of the property, but the state does have broad discretion
over the disposition of the process.
So it wouldn't be out of the question for, uh, the city
to try to, um, get that property ahead of, um, any sort of,
uh, seal bid process or, or otherwise.
The site prep costs for the police station are listed at
5.4 million.
How much is because of, uh, the site is
of a former unstructured landfill.
So the removal and disposal
of the uncontrolled unclassified field is approximately
2.5 million.
Uh, so again, just those are the answers to the questions.
Hopefully those were helpful.
If there's follow up to any of those or other questions.
We have a lot of staff here in the design team.
Um, again, the questions for, for council,
do you support the original options ask
for at your January 13th meeting?
And if so, which one do you, uh, wanna focus on?
Do you support the request of M three C
to expand their focus, to look at other ways to consolidate
and if so, or do you recommend making police
and fire part of their charge?
And ultimately, do you wish to continue to pursue use
of Mahoney for a city service campus
or should new locations be explored,
even if it means splitting up a combined city hall
library and other uses?
That's that.
Thank you. Um, alright.
Or this would ordinarily be the time if
that the council would ask questions of presenters.
Um, I think it is still the time for that.
Is it the wish of the council,
however, that we are for tonight
trying to stick with questions about
what we saw in terms of a, b,
and C options for Mahoney only that we will not
be able to, with any real degree of capability,
figure out the fire station
and the police station at this meeting.
I'm, I'm just looking for a show of hands. A sign of life.
Sorry, can you kind of restate
That, that for this workshop's purposes,
we're really saying Craig's presentation of
what the committee, the Mahoney committee sent back,
here's some A, B,
and C, that that's what we're focused on for this,
for the remaining time
that we are alive in this room tonight.
Does that feel right to you?
I think because it does feel like we can answer the
questions that Scott has posed by doing that.
As long as we can still talk about the committee Yes.
The purpose of the committee. Yeah. Yes.
Okay. I'm just trying to, as I said, try
to steer the ship not onto the rocks,
although it might be too late already.
Um, alright.
Do you have questions of the
presenters counselors?
I don't see questions. No.
None. Okay.
I think my biggest question is, has a decision been made?
Um, it's loose about how much
of a bond we think realistically could pass at this time
and then just work backwards, the money.
Um, okay.
I think the answer is
not at any meeting that I've been part of.
Okay. So, um, alright.
And I'm not sure where this question belongs.
It's a funding question I will ask it.
It's just the, how much we all agreed that
the completed project was just more than anyone could
accept at this time, right?
Not all of us. Well, some of, so, well,
The tax payers, I'm talking about tax tax,
what we think would pass because it would be up for a vote
and it, we may think it's a great thing,
but if it's gonna get voted down, we're back at square one.
Right. So Councilor Coleman, the question
that I thought I heard you ask was, has this council agreed
that there is a ballpark number?
Yeah. And my answer is no,
unless anyone else knows something I don't.
It's that we have not agreed. Okay. So, okay.
I won't even, I'm not gonna ask
my question right this moment.
It doesn't feel appropriate,
but, um, so no other questions of the presenters.
So I think we are opening this up
for some public comment.
Hello.
And remember, if you can say it's 11 o'clock in two
minutes, don't take three. Right? Thank
You. I'll try to do my best.
Um, have any studies been done on, like,
have we done a core sample at the site to verify
that there won't be any issues with the fact
that was a dump at one point?
Uh, yes, we have done, uh, we've done a lot
of, we'll answer.
You have to kind of address your questions.
I apologize. Thank You.
Um, the other question was, um, I mean I just,
and I seem to bring up properties that are for sale.
I mean, as a gentleman tonight mentioned,
the Walgreens is for sale.
It happens to be two point some odd acres.
It's for sale for two $2.8 million right now.
I I why not put the police station there for instance?
I mean, it seems to me like the police
and the fire are really the bigger issue here.
And if I thought this was the issue,
I would have a mask on my face,
worried about the air I was breathing
and the floor was gonna fall in.
But I don't have that beer,
but I think I might have that beer in the fire or the fire.
The fire or the police station.
So again, I believe it's 2 79 Main Street, it's first sale,
$2.85 million, just over two acres.
Okay. You got a checkbook with you?
I write a check every March just like you. Thank you.
Well said.
Hello, Marie Veronique Emmonds on FE and Avenue.
Um, we learned
that the proposed Mahoney Center project was very expensive,
but so exploring other options to reduce the cost
of the project is reasonable.
But while we're doing that, we must make sure
that these options are gonna meet our needs
and renovating Mahoney to only move in the city offices
does not meet those needs.
I understand that there is sentimental support in the
community for maintaining the Mohoney building,
but at what cost?
I do not support spending 57 to $62 million
on a partial solution to preserve the Mahoney building
with city offices in vacant space while ignoring the needs
of the library, police station and fire station.
The police and fire stations are in deplorable condition
and must be addressed soon, not 10 to 20 years from now.
We learned, also learned at the back in the December meeting
that it would cost at least 154 million to do necessary
repairs and upgrades on all of our
city building infrastructure.
How much of that is for library, police and fire stations?
If you add in the cost of fixing all of those to a partial
solution just to preserve Mahoney, are we actually going
to save any money from the full project cost?
We as citizens deserve to know what a complete solution
to our city building infrastructure, including the library,
police, and fire stations would cost without the extra cost
of preserving the Mahoney.
Building a consolidated city center is an excellent idea.
I love it. But maybe it is not feasible
to accomplish this in the Mahoney building
within our budget.
So let us decide if the added cost
of preserving the Mahoney building with all
of the needed reservations
to meet code is worth the additional cost to our taxes.
And if you do have your heart set on Mahoney, please, please
take option C one.
We want it to be a city center that meets all of our needs.
Um, our city's infrastructure needs to be maintained.
Doing nothing is not an option.
So I really support moving forward
with a consolidated city center project,
although perhaps without using the Mahoney building to do
so, if a more economical solution can be fine without
preserving the building. Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much. Do we have anyone else?
This is cottage. Oh.
Oh. Again, last time I swear.
Vicky, I know you must be
getting tired of me getting up here.
Um, Julia Edwards, my face, Dawson, Dawson Street.
Um, I've been having a lot
of conversations in the community, um,
or in I guess my immediate community, um,
regarding the school proposal to consolidate or reconfigure.
Um, and I just wanna point out
that there is a lot of crossover.
Um, and I know that the school department budget
and what the school department does
and what city council does is siloed.
And I understand that's by design
and I get the wisdom behind that.
Um, but I'm wondering if there's an opportunity to
pause a minute, um,
and really consider whether the ship has actually sailed on
making a single elementary school campus
on the Mahoney site, with the exception
of maybe if it doesn't all fit
'cause of the littles, maybe pre-K
and K could go to the Brown campus, um,
leaving several buildings in the city that could be
maybe some affordable housing in neighborhoods
that don't yet have it.
Maybe some sprinkled
city services around the city.
I can't believe I just said sprinkled,
but, um, if you could make it so that there's more access
to city services across the city.
We are so segregated in a lot of ways, um, to the point
where the west side doesn't really even know
that the the center of town exists.
We don't do business there, we don't go there,
we don't like, that's not our city center.
So if you have different
services scattered throughout the city on properties
that the city already owns, um,
IE the school buildings, that might be nice.
Um, and so I guess my question is, I've been told
so many times, no, that's not possible.
Can't do it. The ship has sailed.
I don't recall ever even talking about building the ship
or having a dock to put the ship at.
So like if we could have that conversation openly
and publicly in some fashion to really interrogate it.
Um, we have a segregation problem in our school
system in our elementary schools.
We've addressed it at the middle and high school level.
Um, the best possible way to achieve equity is
to concentrate resources.
That means putting all our kids together as soon
as possible, as early as possible.
Um, to me it'd be a great intention to set Mahoney
as the target location for that
and then have a bunch of options
with these other city buildings.
And I guess I'm not really sure why that hasn't been,
um, openly discussed.
So thank you.
Amelia Rodriguez. Wayne Wright, soccer West.
Um, we all know of the
facility needs in the city.
We've all seen or heard about the stories
of the repair work that's needed in 2019.
The city council chartered a committee to discuss whether
or not to use the Mahoney facility when it became available
as to to meet our facility needs.
Then you've chartered the Mahoney City Center committee
to actually come up with a plan on how to use Mahoney to,
to fulfill our facility needs.
They've given you a plan.
Yes, the project bill is extremely expensive.
Put it to the voters and let us decide whether
or not it's too expensive or not.
If it's too expensive, we'll vote it down,
then you can go back and make a new plan.
If we vote for it, then it wasn't too expensive.
Please get this process moving.
Get a, get a proposal out to the voters
and let us decide one way or another. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else? Come on down
Councilors, Jeff Steinberg Cottage Road.
Um, I have, I've written to you about my, some of my sense
of this project and I've written
to the Mahoney committee as well.
Uh, so I pretty much said what I needed to say in that way,
but I don't want to say these things behind people's back.
I want to be upfront about this.
It seems to me that the central problem that you have, uh,
apart from the money in talking about the Mahoney project,
is that it really has not been very well imagined.
And I'm sorry to say this about the design team,
but I really lack confidence in the way they've exercised
vision, imagination, the other sorts of things
that would make this project a kind of galvanizing idea
for the community that would really carry us forward.
So I don't envy you what you have to do tonight,
because I think you're working
with a very flawed bunch of options.
I just wanna say that aloud. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else? Any more comments?
I don't see anyone rushing public comments closed on this
topic at this time.
I can't imagine we've finished this topic forevermore. Okay.
We have questions. Thank you.
Uh, any studies, core samples at the site?
I think skip you were beginning to answer that.
Ellen Hopkins, director of Facilities. Yes.
We've done, um, uh, multiple studies.
We've done some core drilling over there in the ball fields
as well as around the building.
Uh, we've also dug test pits
and yes, we have identified a lot of, uh, a lot
of dump sites over there.
The whole ball field. Hence the reason in one of the slides,
they showed it via five, $5.4 million site work.
Uh, about two and a half million of that is
because of the dump site and everything that's there.
So there's different ways to build.
We could remove it all or we could drive piles
and go through that stuff and build it up,
but still adds cost to the, to the project.
So, uh, we have identified that which has escalated the cost
for that project over there as well
as structural issues, so and
So forth. I have
a question that I might like to ask him.
This is a question either for you
or, um, we just, um, got EPA brownfield money
and created that nice EPA Brownfield fund.
Is any of that money able to be used for this?
He's shaking his head no. No.
If the simple answer is no, I don't need the details.
Sim simple. There's
no Did you,
what did you say? I didn't even hear what he said.
Simple answer is no. Okay.
The answer is no. We'll talk about
the details another time.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, so in terms of like the, the,
Mr. Cobb talked wasn't a specific ish
question, but about Walgreens.
Yeah, certainly. If the, if the idea is to move away from,
you know, what, what was originally decided on
to develop Mahoney to a campus with PD and library
and city hall, et cetera.
There are a number of other locations that are for sale now
or, or could come in the future that, uh,
could be very good candidates for, um, police
or city hall or what have you.
Um, there's a question about how much of the 154 million
that it would cost us to kind of bring
existing facilities up to, um,
where they should be if we didn't consolidate,
uh, at Mahoney.
How much of that was police, fire library?
Do you all have that ba that breakdown top of mind?
I do. Alright.
I just found it. Where'd it go? Hold on. Oh yeah. Okay.
Uh, without the soft costs,
police and fire is, uh, just a renovation
of existing facilities is 57.2 million.
That's without the soft cost
And library, I think.
Oh, and library was 23.8
without the soft costs.
Thank you. You're welcome.
Uh, and then there was, has there been a conversation
about Mahoney being used as elementary?
I mean, that, that's a pretty new concept probably
to this council and others about the fact that the, um,
school department's looking at
consolidating elementary school.
So there, there really hasn't been much of an option
and there hasn't been a formal request by the school to say,
Hey, we're, we're looking at Mahoney again.
Because they did relent.
They, they said back in, what was it, 2022 or 23?
We no longer have a use for this and we won't in the future.
So Citi, we want you to take it over. And we accepted that.
So, uh, I suppose
For the record, I did make
that possible suggestion last meeting.
Yes. That we use Mahoney to consolidate. Yeah.
May I just say I did bring it up. I
Remember that.
So, but, but there hasn't been a formal request from the
school department and or analysis doesn't mean if Mahoney's
not used for this purpose, that there couldn't be.
And there's wisdom to, hey, if they use it for that
and the other sites are freed up, uh, sure.
But, uh, as of right now, that's why that hasn't occurred.
I think those were all the questions. I,
Yes. Thank you very
much. I, um, just one thing.
I think it's important
that we be a little precise in our language since the school
board is, has a lot of work to do.
They're not saying specific.
They're not, they have stopped using the word consolidating
of the elementary schools
because that would imply that maybe
four schools are becoming three
or whatever, essentially that a a, a middle school, um,
elementary school be closed.
They're saying reconfiguration.
Um, and that that would save them 2 million by putting,
choosing two of the schools for pre-K, k and one
and choosing three of the schools for two, three, and four.
So I just wanted to make sure
that we're putting accurate information out.
The other thing is, I just wanted to share
that when the decision was made
to make Build the Middle school,
our new beautiful middle school, um,
we received $59 million of state funding.
Oh wood, that the state gave us money again.
But, um, it was a good decision
because the building, the middle school cost
rounded off to 70 million.
But at that point, it, the information that we got was
that renovating, trying
to renovate Mahoney
and the way that would meet educational standards as well
as all of the standards that Craig has mentioned was going
to at that point, and you correct me if I'm wrong,
'cause you and I were on school board at that time in 2018,
$19 was upwards of 40 million.
That's correct. And it was,
and the words, I looked them up last night,
costly changes would be in required in order
to bring these facilities up to current building code.
And even then the analysis shows these rebuilt facilities
would not meet educational standards.
Um, and it talks specifically about, um,
the a DA standards plus the fact that the classrooms
will remain well below state standards for size of rooms.
You could all say, oh, come on, you could just fix that
and maybe you could, but that's what was going on in 2018.
Those were the figures we were working with then.
So I kind of like, whoa, what would it be Now?
I just think it's important that we know that stuff.
I also think the state may have some say in that
if we were to try to put that back into a school again
because of the bogging we made with them as far
as the consolidation.
Hmm. Interesting. Okay. Where are we?
Is it still Tuesday? And what do we need to do now?
Um, we are not voting on anything. We're giving guidance.
Are we ready, counsel, to look at the questions
that the city managers po The other thing is, would,
would it be helpful to any counselor member,
other council member if Craig reposted the sixth grid
that had A, B and C and also had prices with them?
I just was hoping
to get one more opportunity to take a quick look at.
That
Might be in purple, but Yes.
You can't really see white blue. I try,
Yeah. Thank you. That's
it. I don't mind that.
It's sort of Well, that's
Might be the best.
Okay.
Hmm. I guess what was getting my attention is at some
point the difference between B one
and C one is somewhat negligible.
But anyway, um, counselors, would you like
to see the questions Scott has asked, posted?
You have those on, right? Yeah.
Yes. Are you looking at them on your computer? I
Have, so yeah,
that's, yep.
Thanks Greg.
Okay, thank you.
Alright, someone has to say something.
Counselor Scott.
Well, since I'm the crazy person
that proposed this bare bones Mahoney approach,
which is obviously a horrible idea,
but I appreciate that everyone worked hard to entertain that
and prove that it was a horrible idea.
I will speak first on my thoughts on this entire plan.
I do not believe that it is appropriate,
although I appreciate the comments
that were made about putting this to voters.
I don't know that I feel comfortable putting
A bond forward to voters that could be voted on positively
by a majority and a minority that may not feel comfortable
or able to pay this value.
I am also not comfortable that we have a good plan
also respecting the amount of work that's happened
between the facilities committee
and the Mahoney committee, that the police
and fire are in the right places.
And I apologize for, again, a horrible idea
and a wet blanket thrown on the city.
But that's where I am. And I really think that
the current Mahoney vision is just
not quite feasible at this time.
I'm not sure where that goes in terms
of the Mahoney committee.
Maybe it's appropriate to ask them
to just start from scratch and think anew,
but I actually think maybe it's worth putting out
an RFP to a third party developer to say,
we wanna preserve this building.
How might you do it? And what are the options
that you think are out there?
I don't think it's feasible for the city to build Mahoney
as it's been imagined by this committee,
even though the imagination
and the plan for this committee is absolutely unbelievable
and fantastic, and I wish we could do it.
So I'm sort of back of the drawing board
At 10:57 PM
Thank you counselor.
Scott, thank you for bravely saying things.
I, I, I sense the gratefulness in your
Yes.
Um, I, sorry,
I was just looking at the questions relative to
what you said and see if you actually breezed
all the way through all of them.
Um, I, yeah,
I got pretty much no to the first two and then yes.
To the middle for M three C
Accurate?
I believe so. Sorry to not be more precise.
I Do We have another brave counselor who wishes
to speak or could be forced to speak
because the sooner we give some feedback,
the sooner we'll be done with the workshop.
So that feels important.
Oh my God. All right.
I'll just be sitting here hitting my own head with the gavel
for a little while, um,
because that would be pretty much as fun as this is.
Um, should I start picking on you and making you speak?
I don't think I have that authority.
Can I, can I ask maybe a more pointed question
that might help spark some debate?
I wonder if it would be helpful for the counselors
to ask maybe a more specific question about whether
or not either all
or a portion of this is
that they would feel positive about
putting that towards voters. I know that's kind of
Part of this, but say it again please.
Whether or not the council, any members of the council.
I mean, I think the A zero through C one is a little bit
of like a wash at this point.
It's not like we're gonna save a lot of money.
I think maybe a helpful question would be whether
or not council feel comfortable putting a portion
or all of this cost in front
of voters in the November, 2026 referendum?
That is a good question.
Um, I would like to us to bring forward something.
It feels irresponsible after all this time and some expense
and hours from our committee
to not put forward something in November.
Um,
I, I don't know.
I, to tell you the truth, I liked hearing from the person
who said it's not you.
He who sort of looked at council
and said, it's actually the voter's decision.
Yeah. I thought that was an interesting idea. Oh, right.
It's, maybe that is true.
So again, not putting anything in front
of the voters feels irresponsible to me. Councilor West
Speaks I'll do it.
Thank you. I I tend to agree with you.
I am not saying that I absolutely am in stone on this,
but I do think that we had a number of workshops.
We've gone through months of thinking
and we had heard from the majority of people
that they would like Mahoney
to remain in public hands, public use.
And we led them to believe we would be going to the voters
with something this November.
So I do believe that we should, my tendency is to believe
that we should keep going in that direction.
If we're going to do that,
I don't think we can expand the mahoning committee
and ask 'em to do more things and whatever.
I think the responsibility rests here
because it's mostly dollars and cents now
and we need to do it.
And we could, once we figure out some mechanics,
we can give it back to the committee to do,
flesh it out a little bit,
what's gonna happen with whatever space.
One big problem for me is, I think we're back to square one
with police and fire when we, the reasons are that
when we went through an exhaustive process,
and I very much appreciate the help
and time that was spent with me even
outside the council meeting
and decided that we had to have it at Mahoney.
We had no idea that the cost of the site development
for the remote Mahoney location was gonna be basically twice
what it would cost to go buy a nice piece
of land somewhere else in the community.
Yeah. So I think that it's incumbent on us to be responsible
to the voters, not only to look at
what other possibilities might exist for the police,
but other ways of financing the police station,
which are seem to be pretty well accepted in other parts
of the country and, and have been used in Maine.
And, and so I think that's something that we just have
to do with fire.
I think we're also back to square one.
I'm gonna look at the chief back there
because until six weeks ago,
the whole thing from the very beginning was
that we were going to relocate.
We were gonna redo the old police station,
the old fire station because it had always been
there and we always worked there.
And that's where it was. And now all of a sudden it's,
it turns out we're not gonna,
we're gonna tear it down if we're gonna tear it down.
It's not a good site for the long term
because when you look at sea level rise
and the slosh maps,
that those roads in the long term are very likely
to be flooded and have all kinds of problems with, uh,
because of climate disruption and sea level rise.
So the it, I think it's incumbent to say,
where could we possibly put it?
And I think the map is really interesting with the circles.
And I wish I were good at drawing the circles on the GIS,
but what about putting it at Hamlin?
If you put the center of your circle and Hamlin and I,
and look at the circle now, leaves
all the eastern waterfront outside your response time,
and we may see some change in use in those areas.
So I'd like to at least see the circle at Hamlin
and just show me, and then you can prove me wrong.
But that's something that I'd like for the next little bit
of time to see if we could possibly put a
police, a fire station there.
Um, with regard to Mahoney,
it's just very discouraging
because I think we've lost sight of our,
of our basic vision.
Um, and I'm gonna just take a minute.
I know it's late and everything,
but remember what we said that our vision
was this when we were gonna form the committee.
This committee offers South Portland residents a unique
opportunity to help shape the future of our city
by guiding the transformation
of the historic Ma Mahoney site into a vibrant,
civic and cultural hub.
We, what we wanted to do was ensure
that Mahoney becomes a welcoming center for the c
for community life, for city services, for the arts,
and for generations to come.
An asset that will serve our entire community
for the next 100 years.
Mahoney will become the public center of the community,
providing opportunities for all
and a source of pride for South Portland and beyond.
So I say to the people in our community,
Mahoney is your building
and we wanna make it into your building.
And I'm sitting up here hearing much too much about city
offices and all that kind of thing when the city,
the city offices exist to serve the public,
and this whole building
and concept needs to be a city center.
I do tend to believe that at this point in time,
we cannot afford to fold the library into it.
Um, and that there may even be a better point
location in our community in the long term for the library.
So now I, I know
and I, what about putting pre-K in Mahoney?
I mean, I know maybe if we're,
if we were not gonna put the library,
could we put the pre-K there?
It's, it seems like maybe that would,
I know it's a school use and all that kind of stuff,
but maybe it wouldn't violate whatever agreements we had
because we were originally gonna have a childcare center
when we first started talking about it.
And anyway, so that's, that's a lot of dribble.
I just, you've just heard it all from me, but that
I Well, it was, it was well spoken dribble.
I hope we can go home soon.
Can I just ask one question, which is,
why is, are we suddenly,
when the school department has not said they need
to use Mahoney, why is that now entering our discussions?
I just don't get it. It's
Nothing to do with us anyway.
Yeah. The reason I said it was
because we've heard from the consultants
that if we don't put the library over there,
we're gonna have a lot of empty bill,
uh, a lot of empty space.
Right. And I, I don't want to, I, I'm not inclined
to leave the space empty.
Um, I would be inclined to go to the ballot. Okay.
I would be inclined to go to the ballot in November
with a bond issue solely for Mahoney.
Whatever we decide to do at Mahoney, I just think we're,
the police and fire are just too far out.
We should finance the police a different way.
Fire is messed up because it shouldn't go where it is.
And now we're gonna tear the building down.
And so that,
and I think we told the people, we keep talking
to them about Mahoney, like the Mahoney building.
Okay. Okay.
If you wanna know, I, when I was looking at this,
and I've been looking at this for several days,
the Mahoney option B one is the library's postponed
and it's renovate the theater and the gym.
And a lot of the space is being used, you know,
the city services occupies a lot of the space.
It could be the library could go there at a later date.
So it takes care. And the library
is really cramped right now.
It is really utilized.
And it would be a really important addition to our,
our city if we had a larger library.
I totally agree. Even
with the satellite over by the middle school.
But that is between,
and that, that, that one also renovates the theater
and the gym, which means there's going to be,
the elevators are in there and everything.
And that cuts it from, well, 86
to 95 million.
That's why I was asking what we think would be
the least burden for the taxpayers if
that bond was brought forth.
And as far as what we do know is that the, that has,
that police station has to vacate, probably first for the,
but if we found other properties, um,
police station on Mahoney to me was like a non-starter
when soil remediation was what it was.
And plus, I really think we need as many fields
in open space for kids to play.
And that was a really big thing.
I kept hearing criticism about that we were taking
away a large green space for kids.
Um, and so if the police station goes someplace else,
we have that money that we wouldn't be spending
for soil remediation for something else.
And there are different things opening up in the city that,
but, and I, it's up to the fire chief
where it needs to meet so that we can meet our rating for,
what is it, the 1.5 for the or five minute response time.
I don't, again, don't know what that circle looks like,
but if you're looking, and I do know that they have to,
you know, we have to have a space for them to go.
So if we start, if we find something
and fund it a different way, we're taking care of two
of our really big needs
and we need to have more questions answered about fire,
where they could possibly go, that's a better,
that meets the needs of the city
for safety and response time.
Thank you. I, I think I had
Coffee interpret that against some of the questions.
Good. I wish I had, I had coffee beans. Oh good.
Um, Scott, can you,
that gives you some guidance there.
One hope yes. No, yes.
I'm, I'm not sure which option I'm putting forward to.
All right. Well, I, we, I did hear Councilor Coleman say
that if she had to pick on that grid,
she was a B one kind of B one B.
Okay. Yeah. Um, councilor Walker, thank you.
Uh, so first and foremost, I fully support C one.
I have not changed my view on this.
I feel like this is a necessary investment in our community.
Um, one of the things that I was really thinking about this
weekend when I was looking at all of this, was I was struck
by the optics of where we are right now in South Portland
because we are struggling with our school budget
and we're struggling with the burden that that's going
to pay place on our taxpayers.
And now we're also talking about making the library wait.
And so we are potentially a community that is saying,
we're not gonna invest in our schools
and we're not gonna invest in our libraries.
And what does that say about where we are as a community?
So I, I just
Strapped for cash
And also maybe one that doesn't value education.
Wow. And so I wanna make sure that we keep
that at the center of our conversation.
It is a balance. I understand that we have to thread
that needle between taxpayers and our investments,
but we have waited so long that this costs that much money.
And there, to me there, you know, a $10 million difference
between B one
and C one is, yes, it's significant,
but I mean, it's not
that significant when you break it down
over the cost of the bond.
So I fully support C one.
Um, yes, I, I do support, um,
reconfiguring the request to the Mahoney committee
because I feel like, as we've talked about earlier,
it's a committee made up of dedicated residents
and staff that have a lot of expertise
and a lot of passion around this project.
And we need to ensure
that we're hearing from the very people that we're going
to bring this bond forward too.
Uh, so I think that's super important.
Um, to Councillor Scott's question, I do think
that we should bring this forward to the voters.
Um, I feel very strongly about that.
And I believe that we should bring
C one forward to the voters.
And then yes, if we have to, I do think
that we could explore new locations if it does indeed turn
out that Mahoney is not the right spot for city services.
I would, I would concede to that.
But I strongly support C one. Thank you
Counselors. Matthews,
or Pride did you wanna speak?
Thank you very much. Council prep.
Um, I struggle with this a little bit
because I feel like I really want to move forward
with police and fire.
Um, the need is there.
We've been told repeatedly that the need is the highest.
Um, and that's, you know,
it's, it's hard for me to sort of make a commitment
to Mahoney or commitment to do a bond
for the other city services while we have that intense need.
Um, I do tend to agree with Councilor West
that if we're knocking down fire, exploring another place
for it that's better.
Considering sea level rise is something, um, you know,
to, to be considered.
Um, I think as we're seeing potential other sites,
um, for, uh, the police station,
you know, I've, I've never really been in favor of
that going on that parcel anyway.
So, um, I am in favor of looking for something else there.
And so it's hard for me to say, let's,
let's do the bond on Mahoney
and find other funding for the other things.
'cause I just, sure, I mean, if we can find other funding
to do police, great.
Um, if we don't have to move forward with a bond
for fire, excellent.
But if those are gonna be bonded,
I think we can make a much better case
to taxpayers about that.
Um, I also sort of struggle a little bit with the library
decision because I feel like from a purely trying
to get voters to support a bond position,
that including the bond, uh, including the library
and the bond is potentially a loser,
um, position wise
because there are, there's a significant portion
of this community that believes the library
that we have now is a treasure.
Um, but that building is a treasure
and should be continued to be used as a library.
And so if those folks sort of unite with the folks
who don't really wanna see the project move forward at all,
'cause they don't want their taxes to go up that much,
then we, we might have,
we might have a loss of the referendum.
We, we saw it when the folks who believed environmentally
that the, uh, the field being, um, you know, artificial turf
at school united with the folks who didn't want
to see their taxes go up.
Well that referendum lost.
But when we changed that referendum to allow
for those people who were not as that,
that we're more environmentally conscious to have something
to vote for in the grass that, you know,
that that moved forward.
So I feel like if we give people a reason not
to support the library, that those interests may unite
with those people who are just against any kind
of change at all.
Um, and, and could sink the project.
So I guess if I was gonna move forward with the,
with the Mahoney renovation, the inclusion
of the library edition
and um, even the postponed library, they,
they aren't really attractive to me.
Um, and so I do think
that it should be something that's community space
beyond just city offices.
And so renovation of the theater
and the gym do make sense to me.
If, if we're gonna put this, the Mahoney bond in front
of folks, um, I want them to be voting for more than just,
um, you know, a new office, a new, a new council chambers.
Um, I, one question, I guess I have sort of looking at a
zero and a one versus B zero and B one is the cost.
'cause you know, in a one we only use the first
two floors of Mahoney.
The top floors not renovated at all is,
and that, that seems to have simply be
because we're not, we're postponing the library,
but we're preparing for it.
If we're preparing for the library, we need
to use all three floors of Mahoney.
If we're not preparing for the library,
we only need to use two outta three.
Why is that? I guess is the, my question is
what is there if we are, you know, if we're gonna prepare
for the, is there a way we use all three floors even if we
aren't preparing for the library?
So again, from a cost exercise of
what is the bare bones, that's what the A was mm-hmm.
Of not touching them.
And so planning still that someday you'll expand there.
So there is a difference in the way the estimate is broken
down between the A's and the B's and the Cs.
The A is totally different from the Bs and Cs.
So for example, the,
I'm not looking at you concert cap,
but the idea of moving into more of the spaces as is
takes more square footage in the A versions.
So we're actually using more square footage in the a version
for city hall services.
'cause we're using existing walls more,
but that's more rented, more area for
that function on the, the lower two floors.
So it's, it's a fine, fine distinction
between the cost estimate,
but there is a difference in each of them compared
to the level of renovation.
So the a's are less renovation,
the B'S are more renovation
and the C is the full renovation.
So there's a, there's a gradient between those.
I, I guess I would've liked to see a version where,
you know, giving the council
and the committee an opportunity
to decide if there was more space
to be used using all three floors.
If there are other community needs we could
meet in those spaces.
Um, and not necessarily say that, you know, we have
to postpone a library and, and, and add other things to it
and what the cost there would be.
I mean, even given all of that, you know, I, I did notice
that slide that, you know, included all these options,
but then also put police and fire costs on top of that.
And, and still we're going, you know,
even at the bare bones approach, we're going double
what I thought it was gonna be when we first started
talking about this project.
And that's what's sort of scary to me. Yeah.
Um, so if, if we were just moving forward with sort of,
let's just talk about city services at Mahoney.
Um, you know, I think I still would sort of go the,
the bare bones approach,
but I'd prefer bare bones plus bare bones of, of just, and,
and when I say bare bones, I guess not really bare bones.
I want you to do the renovation necessary
to use the space appropriately,
but not just on, not also have the library necessarily.
'cause I don't, I don't know that the library, um, is, is
what I would like to see there
because of my worries of, of the support of people.
Which is ironic because I think I, it was a conversation
with me, the first spawn the library moving there.
Thank, um, so I don't know if that answers the question
Well, I think yes.
In three different ways. No, I think you,
there was a threat.
I heard a thread. Okay.
Um, counselor Matthews, you've not gotten to speak.
I do see two other hands. I also have a question.
Do you want to speak? Yeah,
Sure. I just, uh,
uh, I like, uh, old car's idea there, you know,
looking into, uh, Walgreens for the police station.
It's not a bad idea.
So maybe we ought to have somebody take a look at that.
But, uh, if I was gonna go
with anything I probably would send to the voters by, uh,
listening to the gentleman in the back row who was
so patiently been sitting back there all night long,
said, throw it to the voters.
Uh, look, this isn't on us.
We're just, this is kinda like the school budget for us.
We throw it to the voters and they decide.
But if I were gonna pick one, it would probably be the A one
because I think that we could really save the library
and throw a few million into it
and uh, keep it as, uh, as it is, uh, in the same position.
So I would probably favor a one with the renovation
of the theater and the gym,
the police station in a different location
and possibly the fire station, uh, in a different location.
Am I done? Okay. Alright.
Yes. Um, am I allowed to ask Craig a question?
I Craig, what of the possibilities allows
for us to continue to court a some private investment
and allow us to have facility like say we go with B one,
is there still space to do some retail
that somebody might say, Hey,
I wanna put my wood-fired pizza in there
and somebody else wants to put their coffee
and somebody else wants a bookstore
and you know, hey,
I wanna help creatively invest in this place city.
I'm bringing money.
Yes. So the, so your example of
where we had planned the, the library,
could it be used for something else?
The question is how much do we want spend on
prepping the space for someone else to use that space
in the, for example, the B option.
If we want the library as a vision,
if the council chooses the vision to have the library,
we're keeping a placeholder for it.
There could be levels of renovation that allow it to be
basically tenant ready to move in to be leased to if,
if that's allowed to, to take that space.
But that costs money to improve the project.
The same on the a options.
For example, the white space could be rentable space,
even if the city is only using two of the floors,
the third floor could be a tenant,
but it takes cost to renovate that.
That again gets you back to improving the whole building
to reuse and being set up
for filling it versus leaning it empty.
And that's the striking, the balance of
where we left last month was
what is the bare bones not thinking of all
how you could then spend more money to fill it back up.
So I guess it's a, it's a, I think
what I think the discretion or the discussion for us and,
and maybe just for me is what do we want in the building?
Tell us what you want and we can design that project.
If we are looking at options,
then we should definitely pause and not go to referendum.
But if we don't know what we want in the building
or if we wanna set a target budget, we can then come back
to you and tell you what can be in the building.
So I leave those words of wisdom for the council.
Give us direction.
Alright, thank you so much Wes
and Scott, which one of you did, I'm gonna go with Wes,
I think she was up a little sooner, but let's
Go. Uh, a
couple of questions, a couple of comments
with respect to the last one.
As I understand it though, one of the issue is of bonds.
You have to be a bit careful,
but, uh, we'll let, I'll let somebody else speak to me.
But if you start, um, you know, renting that out
to a pizza parlor, you may have some issues
with your bonds as I understand it.
Somebody can, I'd like someone to comment on that topic two,
I like geothermal.
I really like the C geo geothermal. So I was a bit mixed up.
I'm sorry if I'm missing. This Is, does item,
does version B have the geothermal or just C,
Uh, B has the geothermal
because it was planning for the library in the future.
But what if we didn't want the library in the future?
What if we just wanted B We wanted geothermal.
Yes. And then the, the point, another point I,
it's feedback I've gotten from talking to the community is
that we should, we shouldn't be thinking about a whole lot
of money building individual offices that in today's world,
these big spaces that are already in there
actually can function well as offices
because most people sit at their
computers with earphones on.
And it's a whole lot different from the old days when people
used to talk on the telephones.
And so I just passed that along.
I thought it was reasonable comment from
people that I respect.
And through you chair, yes, I, I guess the plan was
to u reutilize as many of those spaces as we can,
even in the C one option.
So a lot of the classrooms, the idea was
that we were fitting those spaces,
but they're not all just classrooms.
There's a lot of different spaces that are there
and the needs of bathrooms and other things as well.
I guess that leads me to a one too.
Is that what you were saying? Oh,
but a one with geothermal, what would a one One plus.
A one plus A plus.
So real quickly, Ellen Sanborn, finance director, um,
the only thing that it would do if you had private use in
the building that you've got um, tax exempt bonds for is it
would not be tax exempt bonds anymore.
So you could do it, you would sell bonds on the market,
um, that are taxable.
The rate interest rate would be higher.
That's all it all it means.
I just wanna make sure too, maybe can,
can you help us understand, so there's talk about other
funding sources for, for PD and FD.
Is there a way to not bond for those things
that like there's, if
I don't know of any off the top of my head at that amount,
um, 'cause we talked about at subcommittee there, the grants
that might be available
for anything don't usually build buildings.
Um, and I don't know Councillor West what you're referring
to about other options
and certainly open to learning about some of those.
But from a bond perspective, you know, if you're borrowing
that much money that's, or building something for
that much money municipally,
that's usually your best option.
Yeah, well I'd be glad to meet
with the staff and talk about it.
I think tonight we're a little bit late.
I just wanna make sure if we're making the decision not
to proceed with police and fire though we're not thinking
that it's not still gonna be a big nut
to chew on. And you know,
Let me say this. I don't think
tonight what I'm thinking we do is we come up
with what we like of these things
and then we tell the committee to work on this.
I mean there's still more work to do
before you can have a bond.
So I'm just saying police
and fire needs to stay with this council
and the committee can keep doing what they're supposed to do
with the Mahoney building.
If this council can give them some guidance about whether we
like a, b, C plus or minus.
Makes sense. We work with the police before 11:30 PM
No, we're not gonna do anything.
Okay. Jason farm, we're not gonna do anymore tonight. Right.
We all agree on that. Think we just got it.
That would just be beyond the pale. Um, counselor Scott.
Super quick one.
I think a one plus plus geothermal third floor.
That's maybe where I'd feel comfortable.
The third floor distinction, I just wanted to clarify
because I was asking the same question.
I think you had a helpful response
and I can't remember if it's the shift of
setting it into a different classification of code and
or whether or not there was a 50 person gathering space
that I think was sort of the toggle of the third floor.
So if you could help distinguish,
'cause I'm not remembering it, that might be a
helpful information for
Yeah, so um,
doing the deeper dive on certain elements of
the code review, we, we push, typically you do code review
after concept design.
It's more, there's a level of understanding.
We did a deeper dive earlier to understand, so what
functions can be on the third floor is there can't be
any assembly space.
A room like this that's over 50 people.
So the mezzanine is on the third floor.
So the mezzanine in the theater cannot be used
as a mezzanine in our building today.
So it's uh, as an assembly space.
So then council chambers
that we actually planned at one point on the second floor
or the third floor, it just means that we have
to make sure our large conference rooms, any meeting spaces
have to be on the second floor.
We can use the third floor fully for offices, um, spaces,
meeting spaces, as long as it's not more than 50 people.
Yeah, I think that's a helpful kind
of toggle in the consideration.
Sure. Of the use. So thank you.
And counsel, I Forgot one thing.
Well now is the 1130 is the perfect time for that thing.
I just wanted to say the fact
that I support a project without the library does not.
What I think can envision being at Mahoney is a whole lot
of the library things that don't have to do with books
can still be at the renovated Mahoney.
In other words, all the various.
And so I wanna make sure
that the space takes that into account.
The various meetings that they have
with their language groups and their knitting groups
and even their book groups and their tai chi
and the things like that.
The, while we see this happening this Friday night,
a movie being there, all those kinds
of things should be at Mahoney
that then would free up more room at the library.
Library, especially their downstairs room that they now use
for various activities could be more book storage.
So that's how I see that playing out.
I wanna make sure that that's clear
that I, that's what I have in mind.
And, and you know, some other, I think as I've said
before, I think we need to have a honney on every single
meeting because there's always going to,
if we're gonna get this ready for November.
Okay. But I'll, I'll stop
because I have other things, other ideas about the design.
Okay. I am gonna stop. Okay. I'm sorry.
So Clear as mud,
Would it? No, it's,
I think that we're getting close to the point
of saying we have a general counsel
idea, but I think the idea is going back
to the committee now mm-hmm.
To play around with,
even though the committee says we gave you our answer.
You did. So we could, well we have a new question.
We could have a committee that says what
we gave you our answer
so we are not the right individuals to give you another one.
Yes, yes. We can ask another.
You could get that, have that happening.
Can I speak to that? Yes, please.
So that was, That was part of the discussion
that we had at the January meeting was exactly that.
That we as a committee voted to recommend the project
that the council saw in January.
And we still recommend that I say we,
because I'm a member of that committee too,
we still recommend that now.
And so if you go back and say, well what do you recommend?
I have a feeling they're going to say,
Well it would be you are now given these
different parameters.
Now what do you recommend? Do your best?
That that would be how it works.
C one I I was at that meeting, I don't know
that I saw a whole lot of appetite for them getting that,
you know, a new assignment back, a reduced assignment.
But I can't speak for the members of
that committee for that.
I had one other question
and it has to do with the costs of a referendum.
Um, you know, it's easy to say, let's throw
that referendum right out
and see what those voters have to say.
How much does that cost?
That would simply be another question on our ballot.
'cause we are scheduled for our general
municipal election in November.
So that staffing cost, everything would remain the same.
It's just going to likely see a larger
turnout amongst our voters.
So our administrative processing
amongst staff will increase.
So it would simply be compensation,
Meaning you need more people to run an election
that you would expect more voters
and you would expect more voters
because this question is on the ballot. Correct.
Yeah. Thank you.
Sorry, I guess I thought your question might be towards
the design cost of getting it to the 30%
that we had endeavored to get to for a referendum.
Is that not what you were asking?
I mean, not administrative cost versus like cost to get the
No, I just, I I I mean,
because we have said, oh, several, a few of us anyway feel
that this, it, we owe the voters or
or a something to vote on in the fall.
And I just, you know, if we give them a something
and then they say we hate this, I just wanted to know
how much money we would've spent to learn that. That's all.
So, well, I mean they'll, there, there's Jessica's cost,
but there are gonna be significant additional costs from the
design team to come up with as to counselor Scott's point
to get to get it to that mm-hmm.
Uh, design the, um, forgetting the term
Yes, I, no, I recognize that, that we will,
that will also be a cost,
but I just, yeah, I, I sort of assumed that one,
but I just didn't know what this one was. Yeah.
Madam Mayor. Okay. I move to suspend the rest
of the meeting and call for adjourn.
I second that. All in favor?
Well we do that sometimes.
Yes, we can do that,
but I feel like we haven't really been very helpful.
So why do we stay here till 1130 if that's what we do?
Are we giving any kind of actionable feedback? Well,
I thought we just did. Yeah.
What I have right now is it seems the majority are a one
and there's varying decisions of, of, um,
geothermal plus plus all these other things not
to repurpose and receipt.
I heard four a plus ones. Yeah. Right.
So I didn't say I was
And not M three C.
No repurposing of them.
And then, um, not really looking at other sites
for city services because you're, you're still in favor of
that option A one and PD
and FD would be something that, uh,
the council would still look at, um,
in conjunction with this.
But no, no formal guidance to the committee on that.
And you, um, I will note
that Councillor Coleman was a B one and I think I'm a B one.
So there you got that.
Well, I could be an A one if, are there,
are there elevators to the third floor in the A one?
Yes. Yes, yes. Then I'm an A one too.
Plus plus plus plus hashtag.
Sorry, sorry, just to clarify.
So again, the a's are bare minimum. Yeah.
So it's one elevator that goes up
where you would normally build two elevators side by each
because the plan would be to do it all at once,
but we're bare minimum.
Yeah. So again, I just want to state that.
Plus, plus, plus Plus, plus plus some elevators
Now. But it's an elevator
plus the geothermal plus
the elevators plus the library.
Sorry. No. Ooh.
What was the motion on the floor to
Adjourn? There's
a motion to adjourn and we could certainly do that.
I hear my pillow calling me,
but, um, I just wonder if we've done anything helpful.
I think maybe we have, we haven't done anything
that harmed anyone.
We haven't done any harm. If you ask
For a vote, the council may say no, we need
to keep going on the agenda, but
Not voting. It's a
workshop, right?
We're voting to adjourn.
Oh, to suspend the remaining meeting and adjourn.
Okay. Alright. So we have a motion
and it was seconded to adjourn.
Is anyone in favor of adjourning at this time?
I suppose. Oh, all right.
I had, I had coffee beans so I could go longer.
Do I wanna get this
decision that we're gonna build with day?
Oh, I, I thought we already just did. Yeah.
Council why else over here?
That's why, that's why I just made a motion
for Oh my goodness.
Okay. So if you had to say in words to the, to Mike,
go back to your committee
and tell them that council recommends X What is Mike saying?
He's saying they recommend, they mostly want
to see if this committee has an appetite for working on
what would be needed to take one of the as
with a little plus plus to the voters.
Is that what he would be saying?
A one with geothermal
and two elevators is what I think I heard.
That's correct. What I heard too,
Lord, it's a bit of a basket of goodies, isn't it?
Piece of that third floor.
A Jess keeps getting her way. The library too.
Can I ask Mike and Craig to just please come to the podium
for one moment please.
Just because it feels like it would be a good idea
to ask you both.
And the city manager may also wanna weigh in.
Do the three of you feel like you have some guidance?
I think so, yes.
A one plus geothermal, two elevators.
Don't, don't count the elevators at the moment.
Just third floor usage. Yeah. Yeah. Third floor use.
And just to make it clear, the, the committee only has
to be repurposed if you weren't using Mahoney as a size.
That question's not even an option.
He doesn't pick an A one.
Mr. City manager, What was that?
Are you ready to call this ma? Done. All right,
Thank. If we weren't,
Can we have another motion to adjourn
Please? Oh, I'd like to
make a motion
to suspend the rest of the meeting
And adjourn. I second the motion.
Motion. Alright. All in favor. Thank you counselors.
Thank you folks.
Thank you staff. Thank you consultants.